Trump hosts Bukele at White House as El Salvador plays key role in administration’s immigration agenda 
In an era when American alliances have been strained to their breaking point by tariff wars and disputes over military spending, one leader has inserted himself firmly in President Donald Trump’s good graces: El Salvador’s Nayib Bukele, who is visiting the White House on Monday.
Bukele’s willingness to accept hundreds of migrants who the Trump administration claims are gang members or violent criminals has been critical to the president’s ambition of deporting as many as a million undocumented people before the first year of his second term is over.
Secretary of State Marco Rubio, who announced Sunday that an additional 10 alleged gang members had been sent to El Salvador, wrote online that Trump and Bukele’s alliance “has become an example for security and prosperity in our hemisphere.”
Monday’s visit cements Bukele’s status as one of the closest foreign partners of the new Trump administration, which has alienated some traditional US allies in its early days.
One of the region’s most popular leaders, Bukele has called himself “the world’s coolest dictator” and the “philosopher king” as he suspends certain civil liberties to go after his country’s gangs.
El Salvador says it shares gang intel with the US — and requests specific deportees
That has earned him the ire of international human rights organizations, which allege large-scale abuses in his crackdown on crime.
But it has also earned him popularity inside El Salvador; Bukele, 43, won reelection last year by a landslide.
Trump has taken notice.
He called his counterpart “President B” on social media over the weekend and praised him for “graciously” accepting “some of the most violent alien enemies of the World and, in particular, the United States.”
“I think he’s doing a fantastic job.
He’s taking care of a lot of problems that we have,” Trump told reporters aboard Air Force One early Sunday morning, as he was returning from Miami after watching a UFC fight.
“He’s been amazing,” Trump said, brushing off any human rights concerns.
“They have some very bad people in that prison.”
The facility Trump was referencing is the notorious Terrorism Confinement Center, or CECOT, which Bukele has invited the US to use to jail deportees for a fee.
El Salvador’s justice and public security minister released a highly produced video Sunday showing the 10 deportees who arrived over the weekend being loaded off a plane and marched into the prison in shackles.
The administration has claimed those sent to El Salvador are terrorists or violent criminals, but evidence proving as much has been scant.
Government lawyers have cited tattoos or clothing linked to gangs in court papers to allege criminality.
To deport some of the men, the administration has relied on the Alien Enemies Act, a centuries-old law allowed for summary deportations in times of war.
The Supreme Court said last week the administration could continue using the law for now to remove migrants from the US.
In a separate decision, the high court said the administration must “facilitate” the return of a Maryland father mistakenly deported to El Salvador, though it stopped short of requiring the government to return him to the United States.
In notorious Salvadoran prison, US deportees live in identical cells to convicted gangsters
Trump said afterward he would follow the court’s directive if it ordered him to “bring somebody back,” though attorneys for the Justice Department haven’t been able to provide information about what they are doing to return Kilmar Armando Abrego Garcia to the US.
The Trump administration did say in a filing Saturday that Abrego Garcia is “alive and secure” in CECOT.
A day later, the administration insisted it is not required to work with officials in El Salvador to secure Abergo Garcia’s return — an argument that has the potential of setting up another high-profile showdown between the administration and the federal judiciary over immigration.
Asked in a briefing last week whether Bukele might bring Abrego Garcia back to the United States during the leader’s trip, White House press secretary Karoline Leavitt demurred, noting the court required the administration to “facilitate the return, not to effectuate the return.”
“President Bukele will be here at the White House on Monday to talk about the cooperation that is at an all-time high,” she said.
“And we very much appreciate President Bukele and El Salvador’s cooperation and the repatriation of El Salvadorian gang members who the previous administration allowed to infiltrate our country.”
Tufts University student details poor conditions in ICE detention ahead of Monday hearing
A federal judge in Vermont will hear arguments Monday on the legality of Rümeysa Öztürk’s detention at a Louisiana immigration facility the Tufts University PhD student described as “unsanitary, unsafe, and inhumane.”
The hearing for Öztürk – whom the US government has accused of being “engaged in activities in support of Hamas” – comes as the Washington Post reports a State Department office failed to find evidence tying her to antisemitism or terrorism just days before she was arrested by Immigration and Customs Enforcement.
The finding was detailed last month in a memo that does not name the State Department office purportedly involved, the Washington Post report says.
Besides pointing to the lack of evidence against Öztürk, the memo noted her name was not associated with any terrorism-related information during a search of US government databases, according to the Post, citing government officials briefed on the memo.
The 30-year-old former Fulbright scholar, who’s originally from Turkey and has been in the US on an F-1 student visa, was detained nearly three weeks ago by masked officers near her apartment in Somerville, Massachusetts.
The government has not specified what the alleged activities “in support of Hamas” were.
Her lawyers say she is unfairly being punished for speaking out in favor of Palestinian rights.
Öztürk is one of several international university students facing deportation as the Trump administration takes aim at pro-Palestinian protesters and activists on college campuses.
The arrests of scholars and students at the hands of masked law enforcement officers – who have taken them into custody by ambushing them on city streets and near their homes – have sent a chill across the international student community.
The Department of Homeland Security originally asked the State Department to cancel Öztürk’s visa under a legal authority meant to safeguard US foreign policy interests, according to the Washington Post, but the State Department memo said Secretary of State Marco Rubio lacked the grounds to do that.
The State Department said the visa could still be revoked without using that particular legal authority because the Immigration and Nationality Act gives the secretary of state complete discretion to do so.
CNN reached out to DHS and the State Department for comment on the Washington Post report.
After her arrest, Öztürk was shuttled through four states and suffered an asthma attack before ending up at the South Louisiana ICE Processing Center in Basile – more than 1,500 miles away from home.
In Monday’s hearing, her attorneys are asking Vermont District Judge William K. Sessions III to rule that the Vermont district court is the appropriate venue to hear the case since it’s the last place she was taken before a final transfer to Louisiana.
They have also asked for Öztürk to be immediately released, saying she is not a flight risk or danger to the community, and she lacked access to asthma medicine in detention.
Öztürk had four asthma attacks while in custody, according to her written declaration filed Thursday.
The Trump administration argued the federal district judge has no authority to consider a challenge to the government’s effort to deport Öztürk.
“The federal immigration laws strip district courts of jurisdiction over the sorts of governmental decisions challenged in the Petition, including the revocation of Petitioner’s student visa and ICE’s decision to initiate removal proceedings,” acting US Attorney Michael Drescher wrote in a court filing.
A week before her arrest, Öztürk had spoken to a lawyer because she was worried for her safety.
She was afraid she would be targeted because a pro-Israel website accused her of being a terrorist sympathizer and published her photo along with personal information.
Six plainclothes officers surrounded Öztürk in late March, neighborhood surveillance video appears to show.
The officers did not show their badges until she was restrained, the video shows.
When the men approached her, she didn’t realize they were government officials.
“I thought they were people who had doxxed me and I was afraid for my safety,” she wrote in a signed statement filed with the court.
Once she was taken to an SUV, they told her she was being arrested but wouldn’t explain why.
At one point, the officers removed her from the car and shackled her feet and belly before putting her in a different car, she said.
Öztürk said she repeatedly asked to speak with her attorney, but was denied or told she would be able to later.
She told the officers she would remain silent after they asked for her name.
“We are not monsters,” the officer told her after she asked if she was safe.
“We do what the government tells us.”
They told Öztürk they would be taking her to Vermont because there were no detention centers in Massachusetts for women, she recounted.
“For nearly 24 hours, her attorney was unable to locate her as ICE agents moved Ms. Öztürk from Somerville to Methuen, MA; then, to Lebanon, NH; and finally, to St. Albans, VT, where she was held in a detention cell overnight before being put on an early morning flight from Patrick Leahy Burlington International Airport to Louisiana the next day,” said the American Civil Liberties Union, which is representing her in the case.
Öztürk, who had been on her way to break her 13-hour Ramadan fast with friends when she was arrested, asked officers for a meal.
They told her they couldn’t provide one but gave her two packets of crackers and water.
She said she didn’t drink or eat because she was worried they could have poisoned them.
“I was afraid that if something happened to me, no one would know where I was,” she said.
Once in Vermont, where she would remain for the night, Öztürk asked to speak to an attorney, but was told that she could not, according to her signed statement submitted to the court.
She later refused to sign a document initiating removal proceedings after she was told it was late and would be hard to find an interpreter.
Having fasted all day, Öztürk felt like she was going to faint, so she asked for a meal.
They gave her more snacks.
At night, her statement says she was approached in her cell and asked questions about applying for asylum and if she was a member of a terrorist organization.
“It was an isolated place with four men and it was terrifying,” she said.
While she was at an Atlanta airport the next morning, Öztürk had an asthma attack.
She used an inhaler, but when the attack persisted, she asked for medication to treat it.
Officers told her they were unable to buy it and that she would get it at her last destination.
Once Öztürk arrived in Louisiana, she was taken to a staging facility where “we were placed in a cage-like vehicle and could not communicate with the officers detaining us,” she said.
She waited for hours without food or water.
Access to food and other necessities was “very limited” when she first arrived at the South Louisiana ICE Processing Center.
Öztürk had another asthma attack, and had to wait about 15 minutes to be taken to a medical center, where a nurse removed her headscarf without her permission.
“’You need to take that thing off your head,’” Öztürk recalled the nurse saying.
She was given a few ibuprofen pills.
Öztürk later had two more asthma attacks at the facility.
“I fear that my asthma is not being adequately treated and it will not be adequately treated while I remain in ICE custody,” she said in her statement.
“The air is full of fumes from cleaning supplies and is damp which triggers my asthma.”
Öztürk has about nine months left to complete her doctorate in child study and human development at Tufts University, she said.
While in detention, she has been unable to work on her dissertation proposal because of the lack of access to needed material.
“I miss interacting with my Tufts community from working with my advisor and professors, supporting my labmates as we worked on peer reviews, my interactions with undergraduate students, and special projects like our Mosiac Art Project and the Collective Grieving Space for children,” she said in the written declaration.
She had been studying in the US since 2018, having received a master’s degree from Columbia University on a Fulbright scholarship, according to her lawyers.
Upon graduation, Öztürk said she had planned to do post-doctoral research on positive media for youth.
Öztürk worries she will miss out on professional opportunities while in detention.
She had been planning to be a presenter at a Minnesota conference this spring.
This summer, she had plans to mentor other university students and to teach a class on children’s media.
Once released, she plans to stay with a friend before returning to her apartment.
“I pray everyday for my release so I can go back to my home and community in Somerville,” she said.
Kilmar Abrego Garcia: Trump administration insists it isn’t required to work with El Salvador to bring back man mistakenly deported
The Trump administration insisted Sunday that it is not required to work with officials in El Salvador to secure the return of a man mistakenly deported to the country, days after the Supreme Court endorsed a federal judge’s directive that US officials must “facilitate” bringing him back stateside.
The argument has the potential of setting up another high-profile showdown between the administration and the federal judiciary over how much power courts have in resolving disputes concerning immigration, particularly ones involving foreign governments.
The assertion, made in court papers by Justice Department lawyers, comes after US District Judge Paula Xinis on Friday ordered the administration to “take all available steps to facilitate” the return of Kilmar Armando Abrego Garcia, who was mistakenly deported to El Salvador’s notorious mega-prison last month.
live updates
The latest on Trump’s trade war and immigration crackdown
“The federal courts have no authority to direct the Executive Branch to conduct foreign relations in a particular way, or engage with a foreign sovereign in a given manner,” the DOJ attorneys wrote in the seven-page filing, arguing officials have a duty only to “remove any domestic obstacles” that may stand in the way of Abrego Garcia returning to the US.
An earlier — yet similar — order from Xinis was appealed by the government up to the Supreme Court, which ultimately backed the judge’s order Thursday.
The high court, however, did not give the administration a deadline for when Abrego Garcia should be returned, saying instead that the district judge’s directive was unclear and needed clarification.
The Supreme Court noted the clarification needed to be made with “due regard for the deference owed to the Executive Branch in the conduct of foreign affairs.”
The administration, the Justice Department lawyers wrote in the Sunday filing, understands “‘facilitate’ to mean what that term has long meant in the immigration context, namely actions allowing an alien to enter the United States.”
“Taking ‘all available steps to facilitate’ the return of Abrego Garcia is thus best read as taking all available steps to remove any domestic obstacles that would otherwise impede the alien’s ability to return here,” they continued.
“Indeed, no other reading of ‘facilitate’ is tenable — or constitutional — here.”
In a separate court filing Sunday, a senior Immigration and Customs Enforcement official said in a sworn statement that Abrego Garcia “is no longer eligible for withholding of removal” because of the administration’s claim that he’s a member of the MS-13 gang, which the Trump administration has designated as a foreign terrorist organization.
In notorious Salvadoran prison, US deportees live in identical cells to convicted gangsters
Abrego Garcia was granted protected status by an immigration judge in 2019 that prohibited the federal government from sending him to El Salvador.
His attorneys say he fled gang violence in El Salvador more than a decade ago.
Under the 2019 order, he was still considered removable; it just couldn’t be to El Salvador.
But the assertion by Evan Katz, an official with ICE’s Enforcement and Removal Operations, means that if Abrego Garcia were brought back to the US, the government would work quickly to deport him.
Katz’s statement was filed as part of the Justice Department’s daily update on what the administration is doing to facilitate Abrego Garcia’s return.
Xinis ordered the updates last week after a DOJ attorney could not provide details on his exact location.
The Trump administration said in its Saturday filing that Abrego Garcia is “alive and secure” in El Salvador’s mega-prison, CECOT.
“It is my understanding based on official reporting from our Embassy in San Salvador that Abrego Garcia is currently being held in the Terrorism Confinement Center in El Salvador,” a senior State Department official wrote in the filing.
“He is alive and secure in that facility.”
What’s next in the case of Mahmoud Khalil after immigration judge says he can be deported?
While an immigration judge’s ruling that Columbia University graduate Mahmoud Khalil – a legal permanent resident – can be deported is a victory for the Trump administration, the legal battle  against his detention and deportation is far from over.
The decision by Assistant Chief Immigration Judge Jamee Comans in Louisiana on Friday came after the federal government submitted what it said was evidence alleging Khalil’s “beliefs, statements or associations” made him deportable.
The judge ruled the Palestinian activist’s presence posed “potentially serious foreign policy consequences,” agreeing with a two-page memo from Secretary of State Marco Rubio earlier in the week accusing Khalil of undermining “U.S. policy to combat anti-Semitism” without citing any allegations of criminal activity.
A “removability finding” in immigration court means the judge has determined the individual is subject to removal from the United States due to a violation of immigration law or lack of legal immigration status.
Khalil’s attorneys said they will appeal.
A Louisiana immigration judge says Mahmoud Khalil can be deported
“We don’t think this is the final word at all,” Marc Van Der Hout, an immigration attorney for Khalil, told CNN after the ruling, referring in part to a separate legal challenge in federal court in New Jersey on grounds that he is being targeted for constitutionally protected free speech.
Khalil has separate court cases playing out in two states – the Louisiana case is focused on his deportation order and the New Jersey case is focused on his habeas petition challenging the legality of his detention.
Immigration officers arrested Khalil last month outside his Columbia University apartment following a deportation order from the Trump administration.
Khalil, who is married to a US citizen, is a prominent Palestinian activist who played a central role in protests against Israel’s war in Gaza on the Ivy League campus last year.
After his detention, Khalil was flown by the government to an immigration detention center in Louisiana.
The case has become a symbol of the Trump administration’s crackdown on pro-Palestinian protests on college campuses.
Here’s a look at what could happen next:
Khalil’s attorneys said they will challenge Friday’s ruling before the Board of Immigration Appeals, and will likely file an asylum case on his behalf.
“We move on now into what’s called the relief stage, where Mahmoud can present certain applications to defend against removal, and we’re set to file additional evidence and applications by April 23,” Johnny Sinodis, an immigration attorney for Khalil, said Friday.
“We foresee that this case will require at least a few more hearings in immigration court before … a final decision is made, at which point there could be appeals.”
Van Der Hout, in a conference call Friday with a federal judge in the New Jersey court where they’re also fighting for his release, said Khalil will likely apply for asylum.
Skye Perryman joins The Lead
Judge rules Mahmoud Khalil is ‘removable’ from the U.S.
“He is entitled to file for relief in the form of asylum withholding removal,” Van Der Hout told the judge.
“So nothing’s going to happen quickly in the immigration proceedings, even though she’s found him removable on the foreign policy ground.”
The Trump administration is attempting to limit asylum claims in the US, an effort that is also under litigation right now.
Aaron Reichlin-Melnick, a senior fellow at the American Immigration Council, an immigrant advocacy group, said on social media the decision on Khalil’s application for relief from removal – whether granted or denied – will likely end up before the Board of Immigration Appeals.
“Neither the immigration judge nor the Board of Immigration Appeals is authorized to hear his arguments that the Trump (administration) is violating the First Amendment here,” Reichlin-Melnick wrote on X.
“If he loses at the BIA, he can make those arguments to a federal circuit court on a second round of appeals.”
Khalil keeps his green card and can’t be deported, Reichlin-Melnick wrote, until he loses at the appeals board and his removal order becomes final.
Newly-released memo from Rubio details government’s only evidence in effort to deport Mahmoud Khalil
“The timeline depends entirely on whether he remains detained.
If yes, it could be 1-2 years until a circuit court weighs in.
If released, it could be 5-7 years,” Reichlin-Melnick wrote.
Khalil’s legal team expects several more immigration hearings will be held before a final decision is made, after which they can make an appeal to the Board of Immigration Appeals.
“Today, we saw our worst fears play out: Mahmoud was subject to a charade of due process, a flagrant violation of his right to a fair hearing, and a weaponization of immigration law to suppress dissent,” Van Der Hout said in a statement.
Khalil’s attorneys have filed multiple petitions challenging the legality of his arrest and detention before US District Court Judge Michael Farbiarz in New Jersey, where Khalil was detained before his transfer to an Immigration and Customs Enforcement detention center in Jena, Louisiana.
Farbiarz told attorneys in a phone conference Friday he’s still deciding whether he has the jurisdiction over the claims filed by Khalil’s legal team – including a habeas corpus motion, one requesting his return to the New York area, and another asking for his release on bail.
The attorneys will continue to seek bail and a preliminary injunction that would release him from custody while his immigration case proceeds, according to the American Civil Liberties Union.
“What happened in immigration court today only confirms the need for the federal court to really intervene and make a decision in this case, because the immigration court made clear today that it won’t, and it believes it can’t,” ACLU lawyer Amy Belsher, who is part of Khalil’s legal team, said Friday.
Mahmoud Khalil’s case to remain in New Jersey after judge denies US government’s bid to move it
Donna Lieberman, the head of the New York Civil Liberties Union, told CNN Friday that Khalil will get a fairer hearing in New Jersey.
“I think that the government was pretty clear that it wanted to get Mahmoud Khalil out of New York City, out of New Jersey and into friendlier territory.
That’s why they spirited him off in the middle of the night to Louisiana,” she said.
Reichlin-Melnick added on X: “The long story short; the case is not even remotely over yet.
There is still a long path forward through multiple different stages before the Trump (administration) succeeds in stripping him of his green card.”
Florida universities join statewide push to partner with ICE on immigration enforcement
Several universities in Florida have signed agreements to cooperate with Immigration and Customs Enforcement amid an ongoing push by state leaders to aid the Trump administration’s crackdown on immigration.
The University of Florida said Friday it has signed the 287(g) agreement that allows local law enforcement to act as immigration officers.
“We can confirm that we have signed the 287(g) agreement,” a spokesperson for the university told CNN.
Under the agreement, ICE delegates to local officers “the authority to perform specified immigration officer functions under the agency’s direction and oversight,” according to the Department of Homeland Security.
The move comes as the Trump administration continues to target foreign nationals affiliated with prestigious American universities.
The earliest high-profile cases focused on those accused of supporting terror organizations, as was the case with Mahmoud Khalil’s arrest following pro-Palestinian protests at Columbia University.
More than 500 student visas revoked as the government expands reasons for deportation
By CNN’s count, more than 525 students, faculty and researchers across across 88 colleges and universities have had their visas revoked this year, as an increasing number of student deportation threats involve the revocation of visas based on relatively minor offenses like years-old misdemeanors.
Four University of Florida students have had their visas revoked, the university’s director of public affairs told CNN Friday.
The prospect of increased immigration enforcement could cause additional friction on the University of Florida campus.
On Wednesday, crowds gathered there to protest the deportation of a Colombian student, according to CNN affiliate WCJB.
Demonstrators said international students are afraid after the deportation, WCJB reported.
The agreement in Florida allows local officers to question those they suspect of being in the country illegally and “to serve and execute warrants of arrest for immigration violations,” according to a statement from Gov. Ron DeSantis in February about other law enforcement agencies in the state who signed similar agreements.
A spokesperson for the governor’s office on Saturday referred questions to the Florida Board of Governors, the governing body of the state university system.
“Several police departments at universities within the State University System of Florida are partnering with U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement,” spokesperson Cassandra Edwards said in an email.
“Our university police departments are always encouraged to collaborate with other law enforcement entities to enforce state and federal law.”
The University of South Florida has entered into an agreement with ICE, a university spokesperson told CNN Saturday.
“All state law enforcement agencies, including USFPD and the police departments at other state universities, are expected to follow the governor’s directive from February to enter into agreements with U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement,” spokesperson Michael Lavelle said.
“USF regularly works with local, state and federal law enforcement agencies to help maintain the safety of the university community and the security of our campuses.”
The University of Central Florida has also signed an agreement with ICE, according to CNN affiliate WFTV.
CNN reached out to Florida International University and Florida Atlantic University about news reports their campus police have done the same.
Across Florida, 200 state, county and municipal law enforcement agencies have entered into 287(g) agreements with ICE, and more than 40 others have agreements pending, according to DHS.
Trump administration lists thousands of immigrants as dead in new policy
The Department of Homeland Security requested the Social Security Administration to enter more than 6,000 names of immigrants into its database used to track dead people, according to a DHS official with knowledge of the decision.
The move will effectively financially starve the immigrants, cutting off their ability to legally work in the country, receive various government benefits and access financial services like credit and bank accounts.
The Trump administration is hoping it will drive them to self-deport, according to the official.
It’s all a part of the administration’s efforts to crack down on migrants in the country.
The move, first reported by The New York Times, targets immigrants who have Social Security numbers and may have entered the United States under programs that have ended, like the Biden administration’s temporary work programs.
A White House official told CNN the immigrants in question are temporarily paroled on the terror watchlist or have FBI criminal records and are ineligible to receive Social Security benefits.
But the official did not provide any further evidence to support that claim.
“Effective April 8, 2025, CBP terminated parole for all these people with written notice to each of them,” the official said.
“Under President Trump’s leadership, the government is finally doing what it should have all along: sharing information across the federal government to solve problems,” a Department of Homeland Security spokesperson said in a statement to CNN.
“Information sharing across agencies is essential to identify who is in our country, including violent criminals, determine what public safety and terror threats may exist, scrub these individuals from voter rolls, as well as identify what public benefits these aliens are using at taxpayer expense.”
Another source with knowledge of activities at SSA tells CNN the DOGE leaders there have now renamed the database previously known as the Social Security Death Master file to the “Ineligible  file.”
The announcement drew sharp criticism from the former SSA commissioner, Martin O’Malley, who served under former President Joe Biden.
“If they can, contrary to the law and every regulation and without any due process, mark people inside SSA’s database dead who legally entered the country and were legally required to be issued a work SSA number, then they can do that to anybody,” O’Malley told CNN.
White House spokeswoman Liz Huston said in a statement: “President Trump promised mass deportations and by removing the monetary incentive for illegal aliens to come and stay, we will encourage them to self-deport.
He is delivering on his promise he made to the American people.”
Immigrants receive Social Security numbers when they are authorized to work legally in the US.
These numbers are crucial for them to land employment.
The agency, however, has recently made it more difficult for immigrants to obtain numbers and cards by requiring them to go to field offices to get the documents instead of having them issued by the US Citizenship and Immigration Services.
The change was first reported by Popular Information and confirmed to CNN by a former Social Security official.
Also, Elon Musk has claimed without evidence that immigrants are abusing the system and improperly receiving Social Security numbers.
He claimed that Democrats are trying to use the program to lure immigrants and tip voting in favor of their party.
Senate Finance Committee ranking member, Democrat  Ron Wyden whose committee oversees Social Security said the move takes away earned benefits.
“Declaring a Social Security number as dead is nearly impossible to undo, doubly so now that Elon Musk and DOGE have eviscerated customer service at the agency.
This action raises the prospect of the Trump Administration stealing legally earned Social Security benefits from American citizens, further proof that Trump’s promise to protect Social Security is a lie.”
Judge will halt Trump administration from ending humanitarian parole for people from four countries
A federal judge said Thursday that she will prevent the Trump administration from ordering hundreds of thousands of Cubans, Haitians, Nicaraguans and Venezuelans with temporary legal status to leave the country later this month.
The ruling is a significant, although perhaps temporary, setback for the administration as it dismantles Biden-era policies that created new and expanded pathways for people to live in the United States, generally for two years with work authorization.
US District Judge Indira Talwani said she would issue a stay on an order for more than 500,000 Cubans, Haitians, Nicaraguans and Venezuelans to leave the country, sparing them until the case advances to the next phase.
Their permits were to be canceled April 24.
During a hearing, Talwani repeatedly questioned the government’s assertion that it could end humanitarian parole for the four nationalities.
She argued that immigrants in the program who are here legally now face an option of “fleeing the country” or staying and “risk losing everything.”
“The nub of the problem here is that the secretary, in cutting short the parole period afforded to these individuals, has to have a reasoned decision,” Talwani said, adding that the explanation for ending the program was “based on an incorrect reading of the law.”
“There was a deal and now that deal has been undercut,” she said later in the hearing.
Last month, the administration revoked legal protections for hundreds of thousands of Cubans, Haitians, Nicaraguans and Venezuelans, setting them up for potential deportation in 30 days.
They arrived with financial sponsors, applying online and paying their own airfare for two-year permits to live and work in the US.
During that time, the beneficiaries needed to find other legal pathways if they wanted to stay longer in the US, parole is a temporary status.
President Donald Trump has been ending legal pathways for immigrants to come to the US, implementing campaign promises to deport millions of people who are in the US illegally.
Outside court, immigration advocates, including Guerline Jozef, founder and executive director of the Haitian Bridge Alliance, one of the plaintiffs in the lawsuit, said attacks on this program contradict the Trump administration’s strategy on immigration.
“We hear the narrative of people coming here illegally and the administration wanting to erase illegal immigration,” Jozef said.
“But, we clearly see today that is not the case.
Even those people who have legal status, are paying their taxes and working are under attack.”
Cesar Baez, an activist of the political opposition in Venezuela, said he feared for his life and left his country to come to the US under the sponsorship of a doctor.
He arrived under the humanitarian parole program in December 2022, and for the last year, has been working as a producer at a media outlet in Washington.
He has applied for a working visa as another way to get legal status and has also requested asylum, but those processes have also been paused under the Trump administration.
For him, the judge’s announcement means hope.
“It is very important for me to have protections and not be removed to Venezuela,” said Baez, 24.
“I have no doubt that if I set foot in the country, I would immediately be imprisoned.”
Zamora, a 34-year-old Cuban woman who asked to be identified only by her last name due to fears of being detained and deported, received the judge’s news as relief.
“I was terrified of being left without a work permit,” said Zamora, whose parole and work permit expire in September.
“We are people who, in order to come here, have gone through several background checks, and the government take away our status as if we had been criminals and entered illegally.”
Advocates, who called the administration’s action “unprecedented,” said it would result in people losing their legal status and ability to work and argued that it violated federal rule-making.
The government’s lawyer, Brian Ward, argued in court that ending the program doesn’t mean that individuals couldn’t be considered for other immigration programs.
He also said the government wouldn’t prioritize them for deportation — something Talwani found suspect, given they could be arrested if they happened to go to the hospital or were involved in a car accident.
The end of temporary protections for these immigrants has generated little political blowback among Republicans other than three Cuban-American representatives from Florida who called for preventing the deportation of the Venezuelans affected.
One of them, Rep. Maria Salazar of Miami, also joined about 200 congressional Democrats this week in co-sponsoring a bill that would enable them to become lawful permanent residents.
Justice Department prosecutors dropping charges against man they accused of being MS-13’s ‘leader for the East Coast’
The Justice Department moved to drop charges Wednesday against a man they had alleged to be a “major leader” of the MS-13 gang – just weeks after publicly lauding his arrest – a move his lawyer says is the first step towards immediately deporting him to El Salvador.
Attorney General Pam Bondi, in a press conference last month, said the man, Henrry Villatoro Santos, was MS-13’s “leader for the East Coast,” and that he was among the “horrible, violent, worst of the worst criminals.”
Now, just two weeks later, Trump’s Justice Department, without explanation, moved to dismiss the single federal charge he faced for unlawfully possessing a firearm.
In a court filing, prosecutors said only that “the government no longer wishes to pursue the instant prosecution at this time.”
A hearing on the motion is scheduled for Tuesday in Alexandria, Virginia.
The switch in tactic comes as the Trump administration works to rapidly deport alleged gang members.
In March, President Donald Trump invoked the Alien Enemies Act of 1798, which gives a president broad power to target and remove undocumented immigrants in times of war or when an enemy attempts an “invasion or predatory incursion.”
Villatoro Santos’ lawyer quickly moved to temporarily keep the federal charges pending against his client, saying that if the case were dropped, Villatoro Santos would be “immediately transferred to ICE custody.”
‘Historical loss’: Alleged gang leader evades US justice with deportation to El Salvador
“The danger of Mr. Villatoro Santos being unlawfully deported by ICE without due process and removed to El Salvador, where he would almost certainly be immediately detained at one of the worst prisons in the world without any right to contest his removal, is substantial, both in light of the Government’s recent actions and the very public pronouncements in this particular case,” defense attorney Muhammad Elsayed wrote to the court.
He cited the ongoing legal battle over Trump’s use of the Alien Enemies Act to deport more than 200 Venezuelan nationals to El Salvador’s maximum-security mega prison.
Elsayed said that “in its rush to prove to the American public that this administration is tough on crime and immigration enforcement,” the government has “wrongfully deported” people and maintains that it has “no obligation” to facilitate their returns.
“The undersigned is keenly aware of the unusual nature of this motion,” he wrote.
“But these are unusual times.”
According to court documents unsealed last month in the Eastern District of Virginia, Villatoro Santos was taken into custody on an outstanding administrative immigration warrant.
He was also charged with illegal possession of a firearm.
Federal agents found several firearms in the residence.
The arrest was executed by a new interagency task force established by the Trump administration to target transnational organized crime and coordinate ongoing immigration enforcement efforts across Virginia.
Its creation was part of a crackdown by the Trump administration on foreign gang members residing in the United States.
Why ICE is really moving detainees hundreds of miles from where they were arrested
When Georgetown University fellow Badar Khan Suri was arrested by federal officers outside his home in Arlington, Virginia, so began a multistate, week-long journey in custody that would end in a rural jail over 1,000 miles away.
An Indian national working as a professor and studying in the US on a visa, Khan Suri was handcuffed on March 17 and taken to the Immigration and Customs Enforcement field office in Chantilly, Virginia, for fingerprinting, DNA swabs and paperwork, according to an amended complaint filed by his attorneys.
He was moved to a detention center in Farmville, Virginia, in the middle of the night, and then to an ICE office in Richmond.
Next, he was taken to an airport, shackled, and flown to a detention facility in Alexandria, Louisiana.
On March 20, Khan Suri was told he’d be sent to New York the next day, but he was instead driven to the Prairieland Detention Center in Alvarado, Texas.
He was housed in a common room with a TV playing 21 hours a day, given a thin plastic mattress for a bed, went without religious accommodations for several days and was given “used, dirty underclothing” to wear, according to the lawsuit.
In all, he was transferred 1,300 miles away from home even though two Virginia detention facilities were not operating at capacity, according to the lawsuit.
The transfers to Louisiana and Texas, his attorneys argued, were “not necessary.”
Khan Suri’s whirlwind journey is not unique.
Other detained immigrants, including Tufts University grad student Rümeysa Öztürk and former Columbia University grad student Mahmoud Khalil, were taken on similarly circuitous routes to faraway facilities.
All three were arrested near their homes in urban East Coast areas and swiftly shipped off to detention facilities in rural Louisiana and Texas.
These transfers underscore ICE’s power in deciding where to house detained migrants – a power that some immigration attorneys say the Trump administration is now using to move disfavored migrants far from their attorneys, families and support systems.
“We’ve always seen transfers within the immigration system,” explained Adriel D.
Orozco, senior policy counsel at the American Immigration Council, an immigrant advocacy group.
“I hadn’t seen such a drastic transfer system, in the sense of sending folks from the Northeast all the way down to the South.
That seems to be more of a change under this Trump 2.0.”
Khan Suri’s attorneys argued in their amended complaint that the moves represent a new government policy “to retaliate and punish noncitizens” like him who support Palestinian rights or are critical of Israeli policy.
“DHS has issued a directive that all individuals who are subject to the policy be transferred to detention centers in the south of the United States to jurisdictions that Respondents perceive will be more favorable to them, and where they will be far away from their families and attorneys, and therefore unable to promptly challenge their detention,” the filing states.
For its part, ICE defends its transfer decisions in terms of practicality and logistics.
A spokesperson for the agency did not comment on any other reasons as suggested in Khan Suri’s complaint.
The agency says on its website that detention is “non-punitive” and that it uses “limited detention resources to detain aliens to secure their presence for immigration proceedings or removal from the United States.”
Most immigration detention facilities are located along the southern border with Mexico.
In fact, about half of all ICE detainees in the US are held in Texas and Louisiana, according to data from Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse (TRAC), a nonpartisan data research organization that tracks immigration records.
Their transfers across multiple state lines have sparked jurisdictional battles between the US government and attorneys representing Öztürk, Khalil, Khan Suri and others.
While those battles play out, they continue to be held in custody more than a thousand miles from home.
None of them have had their motions for release decided by a judge, and the legality of their detention have yet to be considered by the courts.
None of them have been charged with a crime.
These types of interstate transfers have long frustrated immigration attorneys, who say they can be a form of “judge-shopping” to friendlier districts and limit migrants’ ability to contact their lawyers and families.
A glimpse at complaints inside Louisiana and Texas ICE detention centers holding Mahmoud Khalil and Badar Khan Suri
“Part of the problem is they can be picked up and moved around like chess pieces, and that goes back many years,” immigration attorney Neil A.
Weinrib told CNN last month.
“They’ve always done that deliberately.”
For Öztürk, Khalil and Khan Suri – each detained in connection to their apparent pro-Palestinian views – the underlying explanation for being moved thousands of miles away may be less relevant than its devastating impact.
While his jurisdictional battle plays out, Khalil, who is a permanent legal US resident, is sitting inside the Central Louisiana ICE Processing Center, counting down the days until his wife is due to give birth later this month.
“Justice escapes the contours of this nation’s immigration facilities,” Khalil wrote in a public letter dictated to his attorneys by phone last month.
“Who has the right to have rights?
It is certainly not the humans crowded into the cells here.
It isn’t the Senegalese man I met who has been deprived of his liberty for a year, his legal situation in limbo and his family an ocean away.
It isn’t the 21-year-old detainee I met, who stepped foot in this country at age nine, only to be deported without so much as a hearing.”
Court filings on behalf of Khalil, Öztürk and Khan Suri show the challenges migrants face in the detention system, including the whiplash of being arrested and shipped across the country.
In video of Khalil’s arrest, recorded by his wife, she can be heard asking officers multiple times where they are taking her husband.
After ignoring her for several minutes, one of the officers says he’s being taken to 26 Federal Plaza – the Immigration and Customs Enforcement District Office in Lower Manhattan.
The moment set off a chain of events that are still being litigated in court.
As officers drove Khalil downtown, his lawyer raced to file a habeas corpus motion – a petition to determine whether someone is being held legally – in a federal court in New York.
The process took several hours and required Khalil’s attorney to work into the night.
By the time the motion was filed, Khalil had been moved across the Hudson River to a detention facility in Elizabeth, New Jersey, without notice to his attorney.
The government later told a judge the New Jersey detention center was unsuitable “because the facility was dealing with bedbug issues” and lack of space.
Hours later, again without notifying his counsel, he was put on a plane from JFK airport to Dallas and then to Louisiana.
“Throughout this process, Mr. Khalil felt as though he was being kidnapped,” Khalil’s attorneys wrote in documents to the court.
“He was reminded of prior experience fleeing arbitrary detention in Syria and forced disappearance of his friends in Syria in 2013.”
Following oral arguments on Khalil’s jurisdictional battle two weeks ago, his attorneys accused the government of purposely transferring not just Khalil but all the other student detainees.
Ramzi Kaseem, one of the attorneys on Khalil’s legal team described the moves to CNN as part of a coordinated strategy on the government’s part.
“It’s this shell game where the government is trying to make it hard for lawyers to prevent them from doing this so that they can pick the court where they want these cases to move forward,” Kaseem said.
“For some reason they think Louisiana gives them home court advantage.
They want to cut people off from their communities, from their base of support, from their lawyers, from their families, from their schools, their friends and isolate them so that they can deport them in silence.”
In Öztürk’s case, ICE officers determined there would be “no available bedspace” for Öztürk in the New England region prior to arresting her, attorneys for the US Attorney’s Office in Boston said in a filing.
But the lack of resources did not stop them from launching a dash across three states as they tried to find room – something her attorneys challenged later in court, saying the government had facility options in the New England area but simply declined to use them.
Her attorneys told a Boston court last week they were unable to locate her for several hours as immigration officers bounced her around the region.
First, Öztürk was moved to Methuen, Massachusetts; then to Lebanon, New Hampshire; and then to St. Albans, Vermont, where she was held overnight, according to court documents.
From there she was transferred to Alexandria, Louisiana, followed by a final stop at the South Louisiana Correctional Facility in Basile – over 1,600 miles from her home in Boston.
“This all happened without notice to the court, without notice to her counsel,” Öztürk’s attorneys told reporters following a hearing in Boston last week.
One key explanation for why the government moves detainees to faraway facilities is because the majority of detention facilities are located in the southern US.
The ICE detention system is made up of hundreds of jails, prisons and other facilities, and many are concentrated along the border with Mexico, according to TRAC.
Texas houses over 12,000 detainees, by far the most of any state, followed by Louisiana with about 7,000 detainees, according to March data from TRAC.
As of March 17, there was an average daily population of about 40,000 ICE detainees – meaning Texas and Louisiana house about half of all people in the detention system.
By contrast, Massachusetts held just about 400 detainees on average, New York held about 650 detainees and Virginia held about 750, TRAC data shows.
The government generally has a lot of power in choosing where to house detained migrants, Orozco explained.
“Unfortunately, there is a lot of discretion – at least, ICE states they have a lot of discretion – in where they decide to transfer individuals, and they’ve acted in that manner,” he said.
Immigration attorneys and civil rights advocates have sharply criticized many of these facilities for mistreating migrants and preventing them from properly defending their cases.
They say the isolated nature of these rural detention facilities makes it difficult for migrants to communicate with attorneys, family and friends.
“When I’ve had clients, the difficulty there is not having a support system, not knowing what’s going to happen to you inside of those facilities.
(That) can make it so that person decides that they just want to leave,” Orozco said.
For example, Orozco noted one former client who had been in the US for over 10 years, was married to a permanent legal resident and had two US citizen children.
“But after three months (in detention) she said she couldn’t take being in that facility anymore, and so she decided to accept her removal and leave the United States,” Orozco said.
An ICE spokesperson did not comment on the attorney’s allegations of detention location being used as a punishment.
What rights do immigrants have, and what do they not have?
The isolation and difficult conditions in these facilities is a form of coercion, the nonprofit advocacy group Robert F.
Kennedy Human Rights said in a 2024 report on the Louisiana immigration detention system.
“In NOLA ICE detention, officials isolate people with viable defenses to deportation from the legal and language resources needed to fairly present their claims,” the report stated.
“And they use abusive treatment in punitive conditions to coerce people into renouncing those claims and accepting deportation to escape the misery of detention.”
Immigration attorneys have also criticized these detention transfers as a form of judge-shopping.
The idea is that the judge or appeals court in Texas or Louisiana under the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals is likely to have more conservative legal views and be friendlier to the Trump administration’s actions than a court in New York or Massachusetts.
Trump appointed six of the active judges on the Fifth Circuit, in addition to some two-dozen Trump appointees who sit in the district courts the circuit covers.
“I think that there’s maybe that kind of determination being made given that we’re not seeing every person sent to Texas or Louisiana, so they’re being very selective as to making sure that some of these folks are being sent to these facilities,” Orozco said.
Whatever the underlying reasons, court filings show the transfers have had harsh personal consequences for Khalil, Öztürk and Suri.
“His children keep asking their mother when their father will come home,” Suri’s filing states.
“Dr. Khan Suri normally holds his older son every night at bedtime, helping him fall asleep.
Lately, his son has been crying uncontrollably and has stopped speaking.
He is worried especially about his older son.”
Trump 2.0 is in a state of permanent emergency
A version of this story appeared in CNN’s What Matters newsletter.
To get it in your inbox, sign up for free here.
The emergency of the moment is the economy.
President Donald Trump declared a national emergency to address a long-standing trade imbalance and declare a global trade war.
After a week of market calamity and recession fears, Trump blinked on the most severe new taxes, which his aides had recently promised were not a negotiating tactic but were meant to restore trade balance.
Instead, he’ll focus tariffs on China — now set at 125% — and give other countries 90 days to negotiate out of 10% blanket tariffs that remain in place.
Markets surged with relief.
Either the president’s economic team was bluffing when they promised the reciprocal tariffs were here to stay or the economic minds in the White House saw signs of an emerging real-time emergency — a cratering bond market alongside a cratering stock market — and realized a full-on economic implosion was possible.
The economic emergency is just one of a galaxy of emergencies and emergency authorities Trump’s administration cites for his actions.
Earlier tariffs against Canada and Mexico were imposed, the president said, because of the flow of fentanyl, leading Trump to declare emergencies at the US’ northern and southern borders.
Canadians have been angered by the idea that Trump imposed tariffs due to the flow of drugs across the northern border because there’s little evidence of much drug flow there.
“At the end of the day, what we know is the relationship between Canada and the US will never be the same,” Canada’s Foreign Minister Mélanie Joly told CNN’s Jake Tapper on Tuesday.
The military is playing a larger role at the southern border because of the national emergency Trump declared  there, saying that “America’s sovereignty is under attack.”
The language of invasion also plays into Trump’s invocation of the 18th-century Alien Enemies Act, by which the administration deported some migrants without due process.
The Supreme Court allowed the deportations to continue, but said this week that deportees must get a hearing.
Trump declared an emergency authority to supercharge energy production, particularly in the oil and gas industry, and get around environmental and wildlife protections on federal land.
He’s cited that emergency also to invoke wartime powers to supercharge mineral production in the US.
Separately, he’s trying to move the US back toward reliance on coal and cited his energy emergency to reclassify coal as a mineral and make its production a matter of national security.
Coal is not, technically speaking, a mineral.
He also cited the energy emergency to ask his secretary of energy to add more redundant — which presumably means carbon-based — energy sources to the energy grid.
And it was by citing the energy emergency that Trump forced California to open up dams and release billions of gallons of water that was not able to reach fires in Los Angeles and which farmers opposed.
Trump wants more logging in the US, so his administration has invoked emergency authority to boost lumber production in the US.
The idea, again, is to sidestep some environmental protections to open 112 million acres of forestland and make it more difficult for conservation groups to object to logging.
Trump has complained that the US relies on lumber from Canada.
Elizabeth Goitein at the Brennan Center for Justice at New York University has been warning for years about the overuse of emergency power by presidents.
“Emergency powers are designed to let a president respond swiftly to sudden, unforeseen crises that Congress cannot act quickly or flexibly enough to address,” she wrote recently.
“Emergency powers are not meant to solve long-standing problems, no matter how serious those problems may be.
Nor are they intended to give a president the ability to bypass Congress and act as an all-powerful policymaker.”
But efforts to limit emergency power, perhaps by limiting it to 30 days instead of a year, have gone nowhere in Congress.
Presidents frequently use them to impose sanctions.
There’s been an emergency declared with regard to Iran since the 1970s, and Ukraine for more than a decade, for instance.
But Trump’s use of emergency authority to fiddle with the world economy, regulate immigration, police borders and end-run around environmental laws has been supercharged in his second term.
Trump cited a long-standing national emergency with regard to Venezuela not simply to continue sanctions on the country, but also to apply tariffs to any country that does business with Venezuela and to declare the Tren de Aragua criminal network a terrorist organization.
Congress has the power to rescind a president’s national emergency declaration.
The House and Senate both voted to rescind Trump’s first-term border emergency declaration, but could not override his veto.
It would take a supermajority to undeclare an emergency.
That means his mercurial on-and-off approach to imposing tariffs is here to stay.
Treasury Secretary Scott Bessent said Trump’s U-turn Wednesday was the plan all along.
Trump later said he calibrated his approach because people were getting “yippy.”
Anyone who has been watching politics for the past decade will wonder: If organizing other countries against China’s export might was the goal, why did Trump blow up the Trans-Pacific Partnership during his first term?
That multi-country trade deal was aimed at arresting China’s economic influence.
Trump blew it up, and the other countries involved carried on without the US.
Now, over the next 90 days, Trump will engage in negotiations with countries the US could have been in a trade deal with for the past 10 years.
He’s also negotiating with Canada and Mexico, countries he signed a trade deal with during his first term.
If the end goal of addressing the trade balance emergency were restoring manufacturing in the US, one could wonder why Trump has turned against the CHIPS Act, the bipartisan law passed during the Biden administration that intended to seed semiconductor manufacturing in the US.
Trump administration prepares to send more deported migrants to notorious El Salvador prison 
The Trump administration is preparing to send more immigrants with criminal records to El Salvador’s notorious mega prison on the heels of a Supreme Court order allowing the use for now of a sweeping wartime authority for deportations, according to two US officials.
El Salvador has emerged as a key US ally in Latin America as President Donald Trump pushes to advance his aggressive immigration agenda.
El Salvador President Nayib Bukele is expected to visit the White House on Monday to discuss the use of the country’s Cecot prison, the largest in the Americas.
And the Trump administration has even fielded a recent proposal from private security contractor Erik Prince to establish a US-run migrant detention facility in El Salvador, according to three sources familiar with the discussions.
Homeland Security Secretary Kristi Noem said Wednesday the US would continue using the Alien Enemies Act to deport people.
“It’s one of the reasons I went to El Salvador last week was a visit with the President.
Asked him to continue to take terrorists from the United States of America that no longer belong here,” she said.
But the administration’s reliance on El Salvador as it seeks to ramp up deportations has proven to be controversial — prompting fraught legal battles and public pushback.
This week, the Supreme Court allowed Trump to invoke the Alien Enemies Act of 1798 to speed removals, but made clear that officials must give migrants subject to the measure adequate notice, so they have “reasonable time” to bring habeas complaints.
Those complaints have already popped up in some parts of the country.
Federal judges in New York and Texas on Wednesday issued orders to temporarily halt the deportation of Venezuelan plaintiffs in a lawsuit challenging the Trump administration’s use of the Alien Enemies Act.
A timeline of the legal battle over the mistaken deportation of a Maryland father to El Salvador
Amid the legal back and forth, the administration fielded an unprecedented pitch from Prince, a long-time ally of Trump and a notorious private security contractor, to set up a US-run immigrant detention facility in El Salvador to detain immigrants with criminal records, according to the sources familiar with the discussions.
The idea gained traction in some corners of the federal government because some officials believed it would potentially be cheaper to detain immigrants abroad and help shore up detention capacity which is already stretched thin.
But other US officials were more skeptical and have sought to knock it down, seeing it as legally tenuous and unrealistic.
The pitch revealed Prince’s influence on the Trump administration’s push for significantly tougher immigration enforcement and reflected the increasing interest in partnering with El Salvador and its Trump-friendly president in that effort.
But the Supreme Court decision appears to have put Prince’s proposal for another facility on hold because sending migrants to Cecil remains a possibility.
CNN has reached out to both the White House and Prince for comment.
US officials who entertained the idea internally saw it as a way to avoid logistical challenges that have risen with the use of the Naval base in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, and skirt issues related to sending migrants to countries other than their place of origin, according to one source familiar with the discussions.
“Guantanamo is a PR statement that they have to figure out how to get out of.
Logistically, it was a nightmare,” the source said.
In February, the Trump administration halted efforts to place migrants in tent structures built at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, amid concerns that the emerging facilities didn’t meet detention standards because they lacked air conditioning and electricity.
Trump has expressed support for sending US nationals to El Salvador as well, an unprecedented move that would face significant legal pushback.
“I’d love that,” he said when asked by reporters Sunday aboard Air Force One about a proposal from El Salvador’s president to take in convicted US citizens into the country’s high-security mega prison.
“If they can house these horrible criminals for a lot less money than it costs us, I’m all for it, but I’d only do according to the law, but I have suggested that, you know, why should it stop just to people that cross the border illegally?”
Last month, the US removed 238 alleged members of the Venezuelan gang Tren de Aragua held by the US, along with 22 alleged MS-13 members to El Salvador to be detained in the country’s notorious mega prison.
The Trump administration has admitted to mistakenly deporting a Salvadoran national to El Salvador despite a previous order barring his removal to the country over fear of persecution — and come under fire for other cases that have cast doubt over the administration’s assertions that all those sent to the Central American nation were criminals.
The administration has signaled its desire to significantly ramp up immigration detention.
A request for proposals for detention facilities posted by the administration totaled as much as $45 billion over the next two years.
Bukele is key to these efforts, and CNN previously reported that Prince’s direct line to the Salvadoran president has helped a former pariah of Washington establish himself back inside Trump’s orbit.
Prince, who is the brother of Trump’s former Education Secretary Betsy DeVos, founded Blackwater, which gained notoriety in 2007 during the Iraq War, when its private contractors opened fire in Baghdad’s Nisour Square, killing 17 Iraqi civilians.
Four contractors were convicted and later pardoned by Trump.
The company later changed its name and Prince sold the firm in 2010.
He currently identifies himself on his website as an investor, entrepreneur and leader in military affair reforms.
Interviews with more than a dozen current and former administration officials and people close to Prince suggest that he has gained traction within the second Trump administration and is moving quickly to leverage his influence in pursuit of long-held policy beliefs, some of which could turn into big business for him.
Prince previously proposed deputizing private security contractors to swiftly deport undocumented immigrants.
The proposal suggested hiring retired ICE and CBP officers, as well as retired state and local law enforcement and properly trained veterans to arrest people.
When asked about that proposal, Trump said he hadn’t seen it but “wouldn’t be opposed.”
Trump 2.0 is in a state of permanent emergency
A version of this story appeared in CNN’s What Matters newsletter.
To get it in your inbox, sign up for free here.
The emergency of the moment is the economy.
President Donald Trump declared a national emergency to address a long-standing trade imbalance and declare a global trade war.
After a week of market calamity and recession fears, Trump blinked on the most severe new taxes, which his aides had recently promised were not a negotiating tactic but were meant to restore trade balance.
Instead, he’ll focus tariffs on China — now set at 125% — and give other countries 90 days to negotiate out of 10% blanket tariffs that remain in place.
Markets surged with relief.
Either the president’s economic team was bluffing when they promised the reciprocal tariffs were here to stay or the economic minds in the White House saw signs of an emerging real-time emergency — a cratering bond market alongside a cratering stock market — and realized a full-on economic implosion was possible.
The economic emergency is just one of a galaxy of emergencies and emergency authorities Trump’s administration cites for his actions.
Earlier tariffs against Canada and Mexico were imposed, the president said, because of the flow of fentanyl, leading Trump to declare emergencies at the US’ northern and southern borders.
Canadians have been angered by the idea that Trump imposed tariffs due to the flow of drugs across the northern border because there’s little evidence of much drug flow there.
“At the end of the day, what we know is the relationship between Canada and the US will never be the same,” Canada’s Foreign Minister Mélanie Joly told CNN’s Jake Tapper on Tuesday.
The military is playing a larger role at the southern border because of the national emergency Trump declared  there, saying that “America’s sovereignty is under attack.”
The language of invasion also plays into Trump’s invocation of the 18th-century Alien Enemies Act, by which the administration deported some migrants without due process.
The Supreme Court allowed the deportations to continue, but said this week that deportees must get a hearing.
Trump declared an emergency authority to supercharge energy production, particularly in the oil and gas industry, and get around environmental and wildlife protections on federal land.
He’s cited that emergency also to invoke wartime powers to supercharge mineral production in the US.
Separately, he’s trying to move the US back toward reliance on coal and cited his energy emergency to reclassify coal as a mineral and make its production a matter of national security.
Coal is not, technically speaking, a mineral.
He also cited the energy emergency to ask his secretary of energy to add more redundant — which presumably means carbon-based — energy sources to the energy grid.
And it was by citing the energy emergency that Trump forced California to open up dams and release billions of gallons of water that was not able to reach fires in Los Angeles and which farmers opposed.
Trump wants more logging in the US, so his administration has invoked emergency authority to boost lumber production in the US.
The idea, again, is to sidestep some environmental protections to open 112 million acres of forestland and make it more difficult for conservation groups to object to logging.
Trump has complained that the US relies on lumber from Canada.
Elizabeth Goitein at the Brennan Center for Justice at New York University has been warning for years about the overuse of emergency power by presidents.
“Emergency powers are designed to let a president respond swiftly to sudden, unforeseen crises that Congress cannot act quickly or flexibly enough to address,” she wrote recently.
“Emergency powers are not meant to solve long-standing problems, no matter how serious those problems may be.
Nor are they intended to give a president the ability to bypass Congress and act as an all-powerful policymaker.”
But efforts to limit emergency power, perhaps by limiting it to 30 days instead of a year, have gone nowhere in Congress.
Presidents frequently use them to impose sanctions.
There’s been an emergency declared with regard to Iran since the 1970s, and Ukraine for more than a decade, for instance.
But Trump’s use of emergency authority to fiddle with the world economy, regulate immigration, police borders and end-run around environmental laws has been supercharged in his second term.
Trump cited a long-standing national emergency with regard to Venezuela not simply to continue sanctions on the country, but also to apply tariffs to any country that does business with Venezuela and to declare the Tren de Aragua criminal network a terrorist organization.
Congress has the power to rescind a president’s national emergency declaration.
The House and Senate both voted to rescind Trump’s first-term border emergency declaration, but could not override his veto.
It would take a supermajority to undeclare an emergency.
That means his mercurial on-and-off approach to imposing tariffs is here to stay.
Treasury Secretary Scott Bessent said Trump’s U-turn Wednesday was the plan all along.
Trump later said he calibrated his approach because people were getting “yippy.”
Anyone who has been watching politics for the past decade will wonder: If organizing other countries against China’s export might was the goal, why did Trump blow up the Trans-Pacific Partnership during his first term?
That multi-country trade deal was aimed at arresting China’s economic influence.
Trump blew it up, and the other countries involved carried on without the US.
Now, over the next 90 days, Trump will engage in negotiations with countries the US could have been in a trade deal with for the past 10 years.
He’s also negotiating with Canada and Mexico, countries he signed a trade deal with during his first term.
If the end goal of addressing the trade balance emergency were restoring manufacturing in the US, one could wonder why Trump has turned against the CHIPS Act, the bipartisan law passed during the Biden administration that intended to seed semiconductor manufacturing in the US.
Trump administration prepares to send more deported migrants to notorious El Salvador prison
The Trump administration is preparing to send more immigrants with criminal records to El Salvador’s notorious mega prison on the heels of a Supreme Court order allowing the use for now of a sweeping wartime authority for deportations, according to two US officials.
El Salvador has emerged as a key US ally in Latin America as President Donald Trump pushes to advance his aggressive immigration agenda.
El Salvador President Nayib Bukele is expected to visit the White House on Monday to discuss the use of the country’s Cecot prison, the largest in the Americas.
And the Trump administration has even fielded a recent proposal from private security contractor Erik Prince to establish a US-run migrant detention facility in El Salvador, according to three sources familiar with the discussions.
Homeland Security Secretary Kristi Noem said Wednesday the US would continue using the Alien Enemies Act to deport people.
“It’s one of the reasons I went to El Salvador last week was a visit with the President.
Asked him to continue to take terrorists from the United States of America that no longer belong here,” she said.
But the administration’s reliance on El Salvador as it seeks to ramp up deportations has proven to be controversial — prompting fraught legal battles and public pushback.
This week, the Supreme Court allowed Trump to invoke the Alien Enemies Act of 1798 to speed removals, but made clear that officials must give migrants subject to the measure adequate notice, so they have “reasonable time” to bring habeas complaints.
Those complaints have already popped up in some parts of the country.
Federal judges in New York and Texas on Wednesday issued orders to temporarily halt the deportation of Venezuelan plaintiffs in a lawsuit challenging the Trump administration’s use of the Alien Enemies Act.
A timeline of the legal battle over the mistaken deportation of a Maryland father to El Salvador
Amid the legal back and forth, the administration fielded an unprecedented pitch from Prince, a long-time ally of Trump and a notorious private security contractor, to set up a US-run immigrant detention facility in El Salvador to detain immigrants with criminal records, according to the sources familiar with the discussions.
The idea gained traction in some corners of the federal government because some officials believed it would potentially be cheaper to detain immigrants abroad and help shore up detention capacity which is already stretched thin.
But other US officials were more skeptical and have sought to knock it down, seeing it as legally tenuous and unrealistic.
The pitch revealed Prince’s influence on the Trump administration’s push for significantly tougher immigration enforcement and reflected the increasing interest in partnering with El Salvador and its Trump-friendly president in that effort.
But the Supreme Court decision appears to have put Prince’s proposal for another facility on hold because sending migrants to Cecil remains a possibility.
CNN has reached out to both the White House and Prince for comment.
US officials who entertained the idea internally saw it as a way to avoid logistical challenges that have risen with the use of the Naval base in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, and skirt issues related to sending migrants to countries other than their place of origin, according to one source familiar with the discussions.
“Guantanamo is a PR statement that they have to figure out how to get out of.
Logistically, it was a nightmare,” the source said.
In February, the Trump administration halted efforts to place migrants in tent structures built at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, amid concerns that the emerging facilities didn’t meet detention standards because they lacked air conditioning and electricity.
Trump has expressed support for sending US nationals to El Salvador as well, an unprecedented move that would face significant legal pushback.
“I’d love that,” he said when asked by reporters Sunday aboard Air Force One about a proposal from El Salvador’s president to take in convicted US citizens into the country’s high-security mega prison.
“If they can house these horrible criminals for a lot less money than it costs us, I’m all for it, but I’d only do according to the law, but I have suggested that, you know, why should it stop just to people that cross the border illegally?”
Last month, the US removed 238 alleged members of the Venezuelan gang Tren de Aragua held by the US, along with 22 alleged MS-13 members to El Salvador to be detained in the country’s notorious mega prison.
The Trump administration has admitted to mistakenly deporting a Salvadoran national to El Salvador despite a previous order barring his removal to the country over fear of persecution — and come under fire for other cases that have cast doubt over the administration’s assertions that all those sent to the Central American nation were criminals.
The administration has signaled its desire to significantly ramp up immigration detention.
A request for proposals for detention facilities posted by the administration totaled as much as $45 billion over the next two years.
Bukele is key to these efforts, and CNN previously reported that Prince’s direct line to the Salvadoran president has helped a former pariah of Washington establish himself back inside Trump’s orbit.
Prince, who is the brother of Trump’s former Education Secretary Betsy DeVos, founded Blackwater, which gained notoriety in 2007 during the Iraq War, when its private contractors opened fire in Baghdad’s Nisour Square, killing 17 Iraqi civilians.
Four contractors were convicted and later pardoned by Trump.
The company later changed its name and Prince sold the firm in 2010.
He currently identifies himself on his website as an investor, entrepreneur and leader in military affair reforms.
Interviews with more than a dozen current and former administration officials and people close to Prince suggest that he has gained traction within the second Trump administration and is moving quickly to leverage his influence in pursuit of long-held policy beliefs, some of which could turn into big business for him.
Prince previously proposed deputizing private security contractors to swiftly deport undocumented immigrants.
The proposal suggested hiring retired ICE and CBP officers, as well as retired state and local law enforcement and properly trained veterans to arrest people.
When asked about that proposal, Trump said he hadn’t seen it but “wouldn’t be opposed.”
Melanie Krause: Acting IRS commissioner resigning after agency reaches data-sharing deal with immigration authorities
Acting Internal Revenue Service Commissioner Melanie Krause informed her staff Tuesday she is leaving the agency amid internal chaos and the exodus of several senior IRS officials, according to two current IRS employees and one former IRS employee.
Krause’s decision to accept the agency’s deferred resignation offer comes on the heels of the IRS and Department of Homeland Security finalizing an agreement Monday to provide sensitive taxpayer data to federal immigration authorities to help the Trump administration locate and deport undocumented immigrants.
The controversial data sharing agreement between the agencies was one factor that played a role in Krause’s decision to leave, according to one source with knowledge of the situation.
The source said that the last draft of the agreement that Krause had been involved with, and had reviewed, was different than the final agreement.
Krause learned about the details of the final agreement from the news,  the source said.
There were other reasons Krause wanted to leave, the source said, including the direction the agency was going in and the exodus of multiple senior executive career employees within the last few days.
The IRS has seen three leaders depart this year — an unprecedented level of upheaval for the beleaguered tax-collecting agency.
The Biden-appointed and Senate-confirmed IRS commissioner, Danny Werfel, resigned on Inauguration Day.
The acting commissioner who succeeded him, Doug O’Donnell, refused to sign a data-sharing agreement with DHS in February.
Shortly after that, he retired.
Krause then took over in an acting capacity.
She had only been at the IRS for three-and-a-half years before her decision to leave.
“Melanie Krause has been leading the IRS through a time of extraordinary change.
As we focus on IT modernization and re-organize the agency to better serve the taxpayer, we are also in the midst of breaking down data silos that for too long have stood in the way of identifying waste, fraud, and abuse and bringing criminals to justice,” a Treasury Department spokesperson said in a statement.
“We believe these goals are critical to a more efficient government and safer country.
We wish Melanie well on her next endeavor.”
Multiple senior career IRS officials refused to sign the data-sharing agreement with DHS because of grave concerns about its legality, according to a source with direct knowledge of the matter.
This is why Treasury Secretary Scott Bessent ultimately ended up being the person who signed the “memorandum of understanding” with DHS, that source said.
As CNN reported earlier Tuesday, the dispute over the data-sharing deal triggered multiple resignations among senior IRS officials.
Krause and other officials have faced pressure in recent weeks from Treasury and other administration officials amid broader discussions of planned changes at the IRS, according to a person familiar with the talks.
A top priority for the administration is reassigning IRS criminal investigators to do immigration-related investigations to support DHS in border enforcement work.
The discussions have also included the possibility of moving the IRS criminal investigations agency to be part of the Treasury, the person familiar with the matter said.
This story has been updated with additional reporting.
Supreme Court ruling on Alien Enemies Act raises new due process concerns for migrants
The Supreme Court ruling that permits President Donald Trump to use a centuries-old wartime authority to speed deportations is drawing sharp criticism from immigration experts who fear the decision could erode migrants’ due process rights to have their cases reviewed before they’re sent to a foreign prison.
The court’s 5-4 ruling Monday night requires those challenging Trump’s use of the Alien Enemies Act to rely on a complicated and rarely successful legal process known as habeas corpus, and to potentially file those claims in some of the most conservative federal courts in the nation.
Supreme Court allows Trump to enforce Alien Enemies Act for rapid deportations for now
The lack of clarity around how people facing deportation under the 1798 law will be notified and whether they’ll be able to access a lawyer to help them navigate that process is prompting questions about whether Trump’s targets under the act will actually receive the due process the Supreme Court majority promised in its unsigned opinion.
“It’s hard enough for fluent English speakers to do this,” said Elora Mukherjee, director of the Immigrants’ Rights Clinic at Columbia Law School.
“These are extremely significant barriers.”
Attorney General Pam Bondi said in an interview with Fox News on Tuesday that winning habeas challenges wouldn’t be a heavy lift for the Justice Department.
“It will be a much faster hearing,” Bondi said.
“It will be a much smoother, simpler hearing and these people will be deported.”
The Trump administration’s disregard for due process has been a pattern in the legal disputes over his immigration policies.
In another case pending at the Supreme Court, the administration conceded it made an error in deporting Kilmar Armando Abrego Garcia to El Salvador last month but is fighting efforts to bring him back to the US.
Chief Justice John Roberts temporarily paused a Monday midnight deadline for his return to the US in order to give the court more time to review the case.
The administration has asserted that Abrego Garcia is a “high-ranking” member of the MS-13 gang, a claim that appears to be based mainly on information from what the government says is a “reliable source.”
Immigration advocates have also raised questions about others deported to El Salvador based on claims they are members of the Tren de Aragua gang.
Some have claimed they were wrongly suspected of gang activity due to their tattoos.
Heidi Altman, vice president of policy at the National Immigration Law Center, said the practical implications of the court’s Alien Enemies Act ruling are significant given how difficult it is for people being detained to access attorneys.
The court’s opinion, she said, read like it had been written by “someone who hasn’t had their eyes on the reality of the past weeks and the extreme steps this administration is willing to take to get around the very, very few due process protections that currently exist.”
“They’re being handed exactly what they want,” Altman said of the Trump administration.
“The very quick erosion of checks and balances.”
Granting a request from the Trump administration, the Supreme Court lifted a lower court order that blocked immigration officials from relying on the Alien Enemies Act to remove alleged Venezuelan gang members.
The court stressed that anyone subject to removal under the act is entitled to “an opportunity to challenge their removal.”
A timeline of the legal battle over the mistaken deportation of a Maryland father to El Salvador
In one sense, that was a significant rebuke of the Trump administration, which did not previously offer notice or review before hurrying hundreds of Venezuelan nationals onto planes bound for a notorious prison in El Salvador last month.
White House aide Stephen Miller, for instance, has repeatedly asserted that the people deported were not entitled to due process.
But while all nine justices appear to agree that review is required, a majority of the court dramatically limited the practical options.
Groups like the American Civil Liberties Union were attempting to shut down deportations under the act broadly using a federal law that lays out how an administration enacts regulations and other policies.
Now, each individual may have to file their own habeas claim and demonstrate that the government’s attempt to deport them is illegal.
And they will have to file those suits where they are being detained, likely in Texas.
Filing successful habeas claims, meanwhile, can be challenging.
Years after the 2001 terrorist attacks, the Supreme Court made clear that detainees at Guantanamo Bay could challenge their detention through habeas petitions.
But that process quickly ground to a halt in lower courts.
“The real question is whether courts, especially federal courts in Texas, are going to provide the kind of robust, pre-removal process that the majority opinion and Justice Kavanaugh’s concurrence both appear to be envisioning,” said Steve Vladeck, a CNN Supreme Court analyst and professor at Georgetown University Law Center.
“If so, then Monday’s ruling may have only a modest effect going forward.
But there’s a reason why the Trump administration is fighting so hard to have these issues litigated in Texas and the 5th Circuit.”
Dissenting on Monday, Justice Sonia Sotomayor noted that the Venezuelan nationals challenging Trump are not seeking to be released from custody.
Rather, they want to argue they are not gang members, are not subject to Trump’s invocation of the Alien Enemies Act and should not be sent to the Center for Terrorism Confinement, or CECOT, in El Salvador.
Requiring them to file individual suits, the court’s senior liberal wrote, “may have life or death consequences.”
“Individuals who are unable to secure counsel, or who cannot timely appeal an adverse judgment rendered by a habeas court, face the prospect of removal directly into the perilous conditions of El Salvador’s CECOT, where detainees suffer egregious human rights abuses,” Sotomayor wrote.
The option for immigration groups to file lawsuits on behalf of all potential deportees, meanwhile, may be limited by a 2022 Supreme Court decision.
In that case, a majority of justices ruled that challenges under the Immigration and Nationality Act must be brought individually and not on a class-wide basis.
It’s still Antonin Scalia’s Supreme Court
Whether that applies to the Alien Enemies Act is an open question.
Kathleen Bush-Joseph, a policy analyst at the Migration Policy Institute, said that most people facing immigration court proceedings don’t have attorneys.
Even if they are able to hire one, the cases can present unique challenges.
It’s not always clear where Immigration and Customs Enforcement is holding a detainee, for instance.
“What we’re talking about with these types of cases is a heightened level of difficulty because people are detained,” she said.
“Even if you have a lawyer, does your lawyer know where you are?”
While the Supreme Court’s decision will require the government to provide notification to a detainee that the administration may attempt to remove them under the Alien Enemies Act, Altman noted that similar notifications have historically been opaque.
Given language barriers and the lack of lawyers, she said, fighting the law through habeas claims will be a challenge.
The American Civil Liberties Union responded to the Supreme Court’s decision with a habeas lawsuit filed in federal court in New York on Tuesday, attempting to block deportations for its clients as well others who potentially could be deported under the law.
The ACLU lawsuit also asked a federal court to certify a class that would allow the case to cover anyone subject to deportation under the Alien Enemies Act.
The law “has only ever been a power invoked in time of war, and plainly only applies to warlike actions,” the group wrote in the suit.
“It cannot be used here against nationals of a country – Venezuela – with whom the United States is not at war.”
A mom and her three kids were detained by ICE last month at an upstate New York dairy farm. They were just released
A mother and her three children are on their way back home to New York following their detention by immigration enforcement officials last month at a dairy farm, New York Gov. Kathy Hochul announced Monday.
The third grader, two teenagers and their mother, who have not been named publicly, were taken into custody March 27 as officials carried out a search warrant at the farm for a person accused of having “child sexual abuse materials,” Tricia McLaughlin, a spokesperson for the Department of Homeland Security, wrote on X Monday.
During the operation at Old McDonald’s Farm in Sackets Harbor, officials “encountered seven additional illegal aliens on the premises,” including the mother and her children,” McLaughlin said.
The mother and her children were taken to the Karnes County Detention Facility in Texas, nearly 1,800 miles away, according to the New York Immigration Coalition.
Their detention comes as the Trump administration continues to tighten the reins on the country’s immigration policies and practices.
Supreme Court allows Trump to enforce Alien Enemies Act for rapid deportations for now
Details on why the family was detained in the warrant were not released until Monday.
Government and school officials denounced the move while community members marched through the streets of Sackets Harbor, a village in Jefferson County on Lake Ontario, over the weekend to the home of White House border czar Tom Homan to call for their release, CNN affiliate WWNY reported.
“Our 3 students who were taken by ICE were doing everything right,” Jaime Cook, the principal of Sackets Harbor Central School District, said in a statement on Facebook.
“They had declared themselves to immigration judges, attended court on their assigned dates, and were following the legal process.
They are not criminals.”
“Our students were put in handcuffs,” Cook told CNN.
Asked about reports that the children were handcuffed, McLaughlin said in a statement, “Any claims that a third-grade child was handcuffed are not true.
DHS takes its responsibility to protect children seriously.”
Cook learned about the incident from a teacher who tutors one of the teenagers.
When the teacher arrived at the family’s home to pick the student up, they noticed a large ICE presence.
The operation wasn’t a raid, Homan told WWNY last week, nearly a month after he told CNN’s Dana Bash “we have got to do more” to increase the number of immigration arrests.
CNN has reached out to Homan on Tuesday for comment.
As Trump’s immigration crackdown continues, ethics questions are being raised over the use of masked federal agents
“During investigations like that, we have to ensure that any children within that area are safe,” Homan said last week.
“There’s a process during these investigations where could these children – could that family be a material witness in this horrendous crime?
Can they provide information and evidence in this crime?
Were they victimized within this crime?”
After 10 days of uncertainty, Jennifer L.
Gaffney, the superintendent of Sackets Harbor Central School District, is thrilled the family is returning home and hopes they can collectively work to heal from the “traumatic experience,” she said in an online statement.
“What happened to our students was traumatic and unjust,” Cook said in a statement Tuesday.
“New York has been consistent: we are open to working with federal immigration enforcement to crack down on gang members or violent criminals,” Holchul said following news of the family’s release.
“But I will never support cruel actions that rip kids out of school or tear families apart.”
As the family enters “the next phase of navigating their journey through the immigration system,” they are requesting privacy, according to the New York Immigration Coalition.
Authority of federal agents wearing masks when arresting students under scrutiny, amid warnings the tactic will be normalized
As the Trump administration continues to expand its deportation actions, startling scenes have emerged in recent weeks of masked federal agents in plain clothes detaining international students on campus or near their homes, raising serious questions about those tactics and their authority to wear face coverings.
There is no federal policy dictating when officers can or should cover their faces during arrests, but historically they have almost always worn them only while performing undercover work to protect the integrity of ongoing investigations, law enforcement experts told CNN.
Practices have seemingly changed due to the concern agents will be targeted as a byproduct of the Trump administration’s policies, in a climate where the average person can use technology to expose an officer’s personal information, said Jerry Robinette, former Immigration and Customs Enforcement and Homeland Security special agent in charge, who currently serves as a consultant for law enforcement agencies.
What we know about the federal detention of activists, students and scholars connected to universities
The Trump administration’s crackdown on immigration has taken aim at pro-Palestinian student activists and critics of Israel’s policies.
Immigration advocates, attorneys and civil litigators are warning against the normalization of federal agents concealing their faces while detaining nonviolent students.
It is standard procedure for ICE officers and other agents from the Department of Homeland Security to wear plain clothes during field operations if they properly identify themselves as a law enforcement officer, according to John Miller, CNN’s chief law enforcement and intelligence analyst.
But the issue of using masks to deliberately cover the faces of people involved in the operations has become a “lightning rod,” as footage from the detentions – which may have received less attention had the agents followed typical protocols – have “suddenly become high interest,” Miller said.
“It raises the question, if they are legitimate law enforcement agents carrying out a proper arrest under the law, why are they hiding their identities?” Miller said.
The optics are striking because historically in the US, agents have almost always gone without face coverings when arresting some of the country’s most dangerous criminals – such as John Gotti, the head of the Gambino crime family, or the cartel boss El Chapo – unlike in countries like Mexico, Italy or those in the Eastern Bloc, according to Miller and John Sandweg, former acting director of Immigration and Customs Enforcement and former acting general counsel of the Department of Homeland Security.
While the doxxing threat is “real,” Miller said, the detentions are under scrutiny because they’re not being conducted in “crowded demonstrations where they are surrounded by people with cameras and phones, recording video, but in discreet locations like residences, street corners and parking lots.”
Critics of the tactic say the Trump administration is engaging in a “double standard” by demanding bans on masks on college campuses, such as Columbia University, while allowing officers to wear them.
One such critic is Eric Lee, a member of the American Immigration Lawyers Association and the immigration attorney for several student visa holders involved in protests, including Cornell University student Momodou Taal who decided to leave the country after his visa was revoked.
“It would be amusing if it wasn’t so dangerous and hypocritical,” Lee said.
“The students I’m talking to are looking out the window, wondering if every car with tinted windows is filled with ICE agents coming to snatch and disappear them.”
Turkish national Rümeysa Öztürk was physically restrained by six plainclothes officers, most of whom were wearing face coverings, close to Tufts University’s Somerville, Massachusetts, campus where she is a PhD student.
Öztürk is one of several foreign nationals affiliated with prestigious American universities to be detained for purported activities related to terrorist organizations amid the Trump administration’s immigration crackdown.
They include Mahmoud Khalil, a prominent Palestinian activist taken into custody last month outside his Columbia University apartment, who referred to his detention as “an abduction” in a letter to Columbia University.
Khalil’s lawyer, Amy Greer, said in a statement last month: “He was chosen as an example to stifle entirely lawful dissent, in violation of the First Amendment.
The government’s objective is as transparent as it is unlawful.”
Federal judge to consider case of Georgetown fellow arrested by ICE
Surveillance video from Öztürk’s detention appears to show the six plainclothes officers casually approaching her and, shortly afterward, the officers all pull cloth coverings over their mouths and noses, some of them wearing sunglasses, as one of them restrains the student’s hands behind her back.
As the officers say, “We’re the police,” a person not seen in the video can be heard responding, “Yeah, you don’t look like it.
Why are you hiding your faces?”
Sandweg said it is unlikely the officers were directed by agency leaders to wear face coverings during the detentions.
ICE is the principal investigative arm of DHS.
Individual officers have “a lot of discretion” in the field, he said, adding: “This is probably something that was informally discussed in the strategy prior to factoring the arrest.”
As he watched footage of the student’s detention, Sandweg said: “The level of force they bring to bear here … I mean there’s a whole bunch of agents.
That’s a lot of officers to arrest a noncriminal student.”
The officers did not show their badges until she was restrained, the video shows.
Now, she is being held at an Immigration and Customs Enforcement facility in Louisiana.
Similarly, Georgetown University fellow Badar Khan Suri was detained by DHS officers who were “brandishing weapons” and wore black masks covering their faces, his attorney Nermeen Arastu told CNN.
Suri was taken to the same ICE facility in Louisiana, before being moved to Texas, according to the DHS.
Their attorneys have denied claims made by the government about their activities.
When asked by CNN why officers have opted to use masks when detaining students, a DHS spokesman said: “When our heroic law enforcement officers conduct operations, they clearly identify themselves as police while wearing masks to protect themselves from being targeted by known and suspected terrorist sympathizers.”
Immigration attorney Lee said individual agents should be identified, saying they are “responsible for disappearing people who are here on visas and have First Amendment rights.”
The State Department has revoked dozens of student visas around the country in recent weeks, according to Secretary of State Marco Rubio and statements from universities.
The methods are seemingly adopted by those of “secret police,” Lee contended, which have been established by nationalist governments to exert political and social control.
“People have to fight this before it’s too late because they’ll be next.
Being a citizen will not protect them, being against the demonstrations will not protect them,” Lee continued.
A glimpse at complaints inside Louisiana and Texas ICE detention centers holding Mahmoud Khalil and Badar Khan Suri
On the other side, the statement from DHS underscores what Miller, Robinette and Sandweg say is a larger concern of protecting the identities of officers who could be personally targeted or harassed in the context of a politically charged environment and backlash to the Trump administration’s policies.
“They are easy targets regardless of why these folks are being arrested by the agents,” Robinette said, describing the officers.
For those who might expose agents’ identities online, he added, “In my experience, it’s those who have very little to lose by these acts who we are concerned about.
Not to mention the very active groups who will exploit sources to learn about these agents’ personal lives and families, targeting them for harassment and other forms of doxxing.”
An exclusive report by The Associated Press in June 2020 revealed personal information of police officers nationwide – including home addresses, emails and phone numbers – had been leaked on social media.
Citing an unclassified intelligence document from DHS, the AP highlighted specific incidents, including at least one police commissioner who was “targeted for his alleged support of the use of tear gas to disperse protests,” according to the report, obtained by the news organization.
There are two competing issues, Miller says, because on the other hand, there should be a policy on masks: “Do we really want to end up in a place where federal law enforcement agencies turn into masked men showing up in the night?”
In the post-2020 national protest era where activists became more adept at publicly identifying officers, Miller said it has led to officers being harassed at home or “exposed widely on the internet and narratives being placed about brutal militaristic tactics being used by government agents.”
Immigration attorney Lee said it’s a “laughable excuse” for the Trump administration to claim the use of face coverings and plain clothes “are aimed at protecting the culprits for these massive violations on the rights of the entire population.”
“People who are nakedly violating the law are generally the ones who are trying to hide their identities.
It’s quite revealing that ICE and DHS are engaging in this de facto policy now,” Lee opined.
President Donald Trump has called some of the students who have been detained “terrorist sympathizers” and said they are not welcome here.
Attorneys for the detained students are working to get their clients released while the federal government argues over which courts should have jurisdiction in the cases, including Columbia student Mahmoud Khalil and Tufts student Rümeysa Öztürk, who were taken by authorities to a facility in Louisiana.
Sandweg, the former director of ICE, said the face coverings are a “byproduct of this administration’s policies.”
“There is this credible harassment threat, so I’m just torn on this because I hate these images.
It’s so not ideal in any way, shape or form.
But these officers are doing their jobs,” he said.
He continued: “The number one rule of any law enforcement agency is the safety and security of the individual officers.”
A PhD student was snatched by masked officers in broad daylight.
Then she was flown 1,500 miles away
Face coverings weren’t a topic of discussion in the years Sandweg worked closely with ICE in the years before the Covid-19 pandemic, he says but there should be a policy on wearing masks, he added.
“In the rare times they’re wearing masks, it’s because of very specific threat streams, like they’re taking down a high-level cartel member and there might be actual threats to their physical safety,” said Sandweg.
As the Trump administration continues to roll out policies targeting immigrants, experts and immigration attorneys caution the likelihood of more officers following suit and creating a new standard.
Hassan Ahmad, an attorney for Khan Suri, said the circumstances of his detention were “shocking and disgraceful.”
“It should worry everyone that masked government agents can disappear someone from their home and family because the current administration dislikes their opinion,” Ahmad said.
There are times when officers wearing face coverings makes sense, according to Miller, who offered the example of an undercover operative.
“But having the entire arrest team, as they approach the person, pull masks up is a new wrinkle,” he said.
Both Miller and Sandweg say a policy dictating mask use for officers should be in place at the federal level.
“When you start a practice and you have a policy, all you have to do is follow that policy,” Miller said.
“But when you start a practice without a policy and start going too far, usually somebody ends up fixing it for you.”
How Trump’s immigration crackdown could backfire
The Trump administration is cracking down on immigration — legal and otherwise — setting the stage for potential labor shortages, weaker economic growth and higher inflation.
President Donald Trump announced a flurry of immigration policies immediately after taking office in late January, many of them aimed at curbing illegal entries — a core tenet of his presidential campaign.
But he’s also chipped away at legal avenues, such as shutting down the asylum-seeking process at the US-Mexico border and canceling flights for refugees who had already been vetted.
“The reality is that we depend on immigrant labor in this country and Trump’s policies could have enormous consequences for many industries,” Jorge Loweree, managing director of programs at the American Immigration Council, told CNN.
In the past, Trump has said he’d welcome legal immigrants, saying “we have to have the quality people coming in” on his second day in office.
Last week, he unveiled a “gold card” visa program for wealthy foreigners to live and work in the US.
But several experts tell CNN that legal immigration is expected to decline throughout Trump’s second term as his administration fosters a hostile environment for immigrants through its policies and messaging, which could lead to fewer available workers across industries and higher inflation.
There are already signs of legal immigration slowing.
“It’s been surprisingly quiet,” Melissa Lopez, an attorney and executive director of Estrella Del Paso immigration legal services firm, told CNN.
“I’ve been doing this for 17 and a half years here in El Paso, and this feels low.”
As Americans have fewer children, its population is starting to age.
That means the health care industry is increasingly desperate for workers to care for the elderly.
And industries that rely on younger people, including construction and agriculture, are in need of staff.
Economists say immigration is the solution America’s economy needs.
That’s a dilemma — because the White House says immigration is the problem.
Legal immigration to the US dropped off in 2020 because of pandemic-era restrictions, but climbed sharply in the following years.
Last year, about 2.8 million people immigrated to the United States legally, according to the Census Bureau.
That includes refugees and those entering the country through worker visas, accounting for 84% of the country’s population growth in 2024.
A report from the right-leaning Cato Institute released last month argued that today’s high level of immigration gives Trump “more room to implement restrictions” as it tries to “appease his nativist base and the nationalist political class by cutting legal immigration.”
Related card
‘This shouldn’t be their reality’: Trump’s immigration crackdown
“I expect we’ll see further restrictions by the summer,” said David Bier, director of immigration studies at the Cato Institute.
The Trump administration is considering invoking a public health order labeling migrants at the southern border seeking asylum as risks for spreading diseases — a power officials used during the pandemic to seal off the border.
Allianz Trade forecasts legal immigration to be cut nearly by half by 2026.
Coupled with mass deportations, that slowdown in immigration could prompt population growth to drop 0.2% that year.
Jennifer Babaie, director of advocacy and legal services at Las Americas Immigrant Advocacy Center, said she expects it “to be much more difficult for folks to apply for anything” in the coming years, ultimately reducing the number of people who successfully immigrate to the US legally.
“We’re expecting delays, both because personnel in the court has dropped and also because (immigration and customs) personnel and funding is at risk,” Babaie said.
“We’re also now spending hours going into detention just trying to interview folks to understand what is going on because we’re not getting any information or cooperation from the administration, and that cuts into the time that we could be working on a complicated brief.”
There were 47.8 million immigrants in the United States in 2023, with a total of $1.7 trillion in spending power and who paid about $652 billion in taxes, according the American Immigration Council.
That economic might is at risk from Trump’s immigration agenda.
The Allianz Trade forecast estimates that Trump’s crackdown on illegal and legal immigration could drag down GDP to an annualized growth rate of below 2% by 2026.
The Brookings Institution estimates that growth could be 0.4 percentage-point lower this year, if Trump continues to restrict legal immigration and manages to conduct 3.4 million deportations.
On the campaign trail, Trump said he wants to deport “probably 15 million and maybe as many as 20 million” people, which would be a complicated and costly undertaking.
Here’s how mass deportations could change the housing market
Immigrants comprise more than 20% of employment in agriculture, construction, transportation, warehousing, general services and waste services, the American Immigration Council estimates.
That means employers in those industries are expected to be in a bind as Trump proceeds with mass deportations and limiting legal immigration.
“These industries have very tight labor markets, so being very restrictive and aggressive on immigration is not going to give Trump that economic growth and success that he wants,” said Giovanni Peri, an economics professor at the University of California, Davis, who studies the intersection of immigration and labor.
Peri said that labor shortages, spurred by a clamp-down on immigration, could result in rising prices for food, housing and tourism.
He added that immigration labor is essential also because of the country’s changing demographics.
“In a situation in which there are going to be many more Americans retiring, more immigration would really benefit the labor market and the growth in the economy,” Peri said.
IRS reaches data-sharing deal with DHS to help find undocumented immigrants for deportation
The Department of Homeland Security and the Internal Revenue Service finalized an agreement Monday to provide sensitive taxpayer data to federal immigration authorities as part of President Donald Trump’s deportation push, according to court filings.
As part of the deal, the IRS agreed to turn over information about undocumented immigrants who DHS says are already facing deportation orders and are under federal criminal investigation, including for the crime of failing to leave the country, according to the filings.
Treasury Secretary Scott Bessent and Homeland Security Secretary Kristi Noem signed the agreement.
CNN reported last month that the IRS was nearing a deal to help Immigration and Customs Enforcement track down undocumented immigrants for possible deportation.
The announcement comes after months of tension within IRS over the data-sharing plans and internal concerns from career officials about the legality of the collaboration.
It also comes after a tense meeting last week between the two agencies as they worked to finalize the agreement.
Acting IRS commissioner resigning after agency reaches data-sharing deal with immigration authorities
The chaos has led to the resignation or impending departure of several senior IRS officials, amid the moral dilemmas posed to the agency by the Trump administration’s immigration push, according to multiple sources with knowledge of the situation.
This includes the IRS’ chief privacy officer and others involved in safeguarding taxpayer data.
Parts of the 15-page “memorandum of understanding” are redacted, making it difficult to discern exactly what IRS will provide.
But the terms of the deal say ICE will come to the IRS with the names and address of taxpayers that they believe have violated federal immigration laws.
The IRS would then cross-reference that information with existing taxpayer data and confirm its accuracy, CNN previously reported.
IRS has addresses for undocumented immigrants because many members of that community register with the agency and pay billions of dollars in taxes each year – in exchange for their data staying confidential in most circumstances.
“The bases for this (memorandum of understanding) are founded in longstanding authorities granted by Congress, which serve to protect the privacy of law-abiding Americans while streamlining the ability to pursue criminals,” a Treasury spokesperson said in a statement.
This is the latest boost for Trump’s immigration agenda, after a favorable Supreme Court ruling Monday cleared him to use colonial-era laws to hasten some deportations, at least for now.
“It is so troubling” an IRS source told CNN of the impending data-sharing with DHS.
“We ask (undocumented immigrants) to pay their taxes and do the right thing, and in exchange we will only use this information for tax administration.
Now we are basically breaking their trust and the law and taking their information and using it to find them and deport them.
It’s unethical when you think about what we’ve promised them.”
Liberal advocacy organizations, immigrant rights groups and Democratic lawmakers have slammed the Trump administration for trying to use IRS data to facilitate deportations.
They say this is a breach of trust because IRS data is supposed to stay confidential, and it will discourage undocumented immigrants from paying taxes in the future.
CNN reported last week that some experts believe the uptick in requested tax filing extensions, compared with this time last year, can be attributed in part to resistance among undocumented immigrants.
Undocumented immigrants are often urged to register with the IRS and pay their federal taxes because it makes them look like law-abiding residents and could aid their immigration case.
The IRS-ICE deal repeatedly states that any cooperation between the agencies will be done in accordance with the federal laws that dictate when taxpayer data can – and can’t – be shared.
“Each request must be made consistent” with the tax code, and ICE will “ensure the proper handling, transmission, safeguarding, and security” of information it receives, the deal says.
Immigrant rights groups filed a lawsuit last month to block the IRS from turning over data to ICE.
A judge declined to issue an emergency order, but another hearing is set for next week.
Justice Department lawyers said in a filing that the newly inked arrangement “is lawful.”
“The Memorandum of Understanding signed by the Department of the Treasury and DHS reiterates the agencies’ commitment to sharing information only in the way that (the federal tax code) permits and includes clear guardrails to ensure compliance,” they wrote Monday.
Lawyers from the liberal organization Public Citizen, who represent the immigrant groups, have argued that the arrangement doesn’t pass legal muster and are asking a federal judge to step in.
“The IRS has gone back on its duty to protect taxpayer information from improper disclosure,” attorney Nandan Joshi said about the deal with ICE.
“If allowed to stand, this agreement will provide a roadmap for federal law enforcement to gain access to confidential taxpayer information without obtaining court order as required by law.”
The agreement also says ICE might use artificial intelligence to analyze taxpayer data, but it would need to notify the IRS’ Office of Safeguards to ensure it complies with federal law.
The IRS’ chief privacy officer – who is planning to leave the agency soon – has said in sworn affidavits, including one filed Monday, that the agency hasn’t yet turned over any taxpayer information to DHS or ICE since Trump took office.
Political appointees at the IRS stepped up their efforts last week to iron out the specifics of the data-sharing agreement with ICE and its legal constraints.
In a recent video call, DHS officials told IRS officials they needed access to their data to help them locate up to 7 million suspected undocumented immigrants – an eye-popping figure that “shocked” IRS employees, according to a source with knowledge of the meeting.
The DHS officials said they had names and addresses for the suspected undocumented immigrants, but they feared the information is outdated and inaccurate.
The source with knowledge also described moments of frustration among the DHS officials who at times appeared stumped when they learned that the IRS would only be able to confirm if they had a match in their system, and would not be allowed to provide new information like an updated or more accurate home address.
“They were not happy, and they were perplexed by the specificity of the law,” the source said.
Sources said the IRS employees left the meeting with suspicions that the DHS officials might mishandle the data and “may not intend to follow the law.”
The immigration deal, among other factors, triggered the ongoing exodus of senior IRS staff.
The agency’s chief-of-staff departed last week.
The chief financial officer, chief privacy officer and chief risk officer have all notified leadership within the past few days that they will also depart.
One source with knowledge told CNN that several other senior leaders are actively considering accepting the agency’s second “deferred resignation” offer, which was sent to employees over the weekend.
“A large swath of leadership is leaving or considering leaving in the next couple of weeks,” the source said.
Their exit is seen by many at the agency as a loss of one of the last lines of defense against the potential unlawful use of taxpayer data by the Trump administration, including for immigration enforcement.
“It’s the immigration stuff, it’s the slashing and burning,” one source said.
This story has been updated with additional reporting.
Trump’s immigration crackdown is hitting Modelo and Corona sales, CEO says
President Donald Trump’s deportation push is spooking Latino customers and hurting beer sales, according to Modelo and Corona owner Constellation Brands.
Since taking office, Trump and his team have enacted aggressive measures to crack down on immigration, including invoking a rarely used wartime authority.
The Trump administration has made some missteps in recent weeks, including mistakenly deporting a Salvadoran man.
About half of Constellation’s US customers are Hispanic, and some have stopped going out to restaurants and gathering in large groups out of fear of being swept up in deportations, Constellation Brands’ CEO William Newlands said on a conference call with analysts Thursday.
“A lot of consumers in the Hispanic community are concerned right now,” he said.
“Social gatherings, an area where the Hispanic consumer often consumes beer, are declining today as part of these overarching concerns that they have.”
That pullback contributed to a 1% drop in Constellation’s beer shipments last quarter.
Constellation said that the slowdown in beer sales was most pronounced at retailers in neighborhoods with large Hispanic populations.
In an interview with the Wall Street Journal, Newlands said some Latino shoppers are shifting their shopping to large retail chains in an attempt to blend into a crowd.
That means they are no longer frequenting smaller convenience stores or bodegas that primarily serve Hispanic consumers.
Trump’s immigration policies are another source of pressure on companies, in addition to tariffs that caused economic turmoil and threaten a recession.
Burlington, Foot Locker, Colgate-Palmolive, and Monster have all noted sluggish sales among Hispanic customers in recent weeks.
“There obviously is an impact on Hispanic demand, as we’ve seen, lower traffic from Hispanic consumers,” Colgate-Palmolive vice president John Faucher said at a conference last month.
So far this year, discretionary purchases among Hispanic consumers have fallen at a faster clip than non-Hispanic customers, according to market research firm Circana.
A “consistent theme we have heard over the last several months has been mounting pressure among [Hispanic consumers] stemming from concerns on immigration policy,” Nik Modi, an analyst at RBC Capital Markets, said in a note to clients last week.
“This has manifested in pull back from retail.”
How Trump calling immigration an ‘invasion’ could help him stretch the law
No longer just campaign trail rhetoric, President Donald Trump’s insistence that immigration to the United States amounts to an “invasion” may be critical to unlocking extraordinary powers as the administration carries out his deportation agenda.
Multiple executive orders and agency memos use the word “invasion” to describe why Trump is taking actions that tighten the US border, empower state and local officials to carry out immigration enforcement, and take a more aggressive approach to detaining and deporting migrants.
Some orders signed by Trump last week use “Invasion” in their titles, and one proclamation is built specifically around a constitutional provision that says the federal government is obligated to protect the states “against invasion.” In another early action, Trump issued a national emergency declaration the described an “invasion” at the border that “has caused widespread chaos and suffering in our country over the last 4 years.”
The word choice is intentional.
Tracking Trump’s executive actions
Legal experts believe the administration could try to rely on the invasion rationale to justify possible future actions that would go beyond the limits of immigration law and that would ignore the procedures in place for border-crossers.
“The invasion point comes in here, because the most basic and longstanding purpose to having a military is to stop people from invading your country.
And that’s what’s happening at the southern border,” said Ken Cuccinelli, who served as the acting deputy secretary of Homeland Security in the first Trump administration.
“The president doesn’t need anything beyond his commander in chief authority to block people from crossing the border illegally.”
It also previews how the Justice Department will defend his immigration agenda in court, hoping to capitalize on how courts have historically deferred to a president’s actions in instances of a national emergency.
“He is trying to invoke a fiction in order to increase the power of the president in ways that are completely inapplicable to this situation,” said Lucas Guttentag, a Stanford Law professor who founded the American Civil Liberties Union’s Immigrants’ Rights Project and who served in top roles in Democratic administration.
The language harkens to constitutional provisions that give federal government and states special powers in times of invasion.
The possible invocation of the 1798 Alien Enemies Act is also hanging over how Trump’s anti-immigration agenda is being framed so far.
That law, which Trump touted on the campaign trail, allows the federal government to depart from the usual procedures for detentions and deportations in a time of “Invasion or predatory incursion.”
“We are not there yet,” said Steve Vladeck, a CNN Supreme Court analyst and Georgetown University Law Center professor, but, “we may well be in for a very, very big, pitched legal battle over whether there really is an invasion along the southern border and what the legal consequences are of that are.”
In a statement, White House spokesperson Kush Desai said that “tens of millions of unvetted illegal migrants and literal tons of illicit drugs like fentanyl and methamphetamine poured over the southern border into American communities over the last four years.”
“That is an invasion, and the American people recognize that this the reality – that’s why they delivered a resounding mandate to President Trump to secure our border and communities,” Desai said.
The embrace of the invasion idea picks up on claims that states like Texas were making in legal disputes with the Biden administration over what role they could play in policing the border.
In addition to the Constitution’s guarantee that the federal government shall protect states from invasion, another provision allows states to engage in war when they are “actually invaded.”
“When you put those two things together, what do you get?” said Joshua Blackman, a professor at South Texas College of Law.
“If a president declares an invasion, a state can engage in war.”
The argument could allow states to take actions that federal law would normally foreclose, Blackman said, but the proposition will have to be tested in court.
“It’s significant constitutional power that hasn’t really been discussed at all,” Blackman said.
The administration has emphasized it’s looking for help from the states in its efforts to arrest and detain undocumented immigrants.
Last week, then-acting Homeland Security Secretary released a memo, pivoting off of Trump’s invasion-oriented executive orders, that made a finding of a “mass influx” of migrants to trigger new state authorities for immigration enforcement.
According to Vladeck, the administration’s use of such language gives “cover” to state officials like Texas Gov. Greg Abbott who have sought for their states to take a more direct role in immigration enforcement.
Texas, for instance, has used the “invasion” rationale in court to defend a state law, challenged by the Biden administration, that allows state officials to arrest and detain people suspected of entering the country illegally.
Legal experts see the invasion motif as a signal for powers that Trump administration may seek to exercise to take his anti-immigration agenda even further and to potentially try to overcome laws imposed by Congress that traditionally dictate border policy.
Ilya Somin, a professor of law at George Mason University, pointed to past instances where courts struck down attempts to end all asylum procedures at the border, concluding such moves as violations of the Refugee Act.
“Part of the purpose of the invasion argument is they say, ‘Well, that overrides statutory constraints that Congress might otherwise put in place,’” Somin said.
The invasion language could also be “setting the stage” for invocation of the Alien Enemies Act, Vladeck said, referring to the 1798 statute last used during World War II that would let the government eschew the due process protections afforded to immigrants before they can be deported.
The law was referenced in a Trump executive order last week that designated cartels as foreign terrorist organizations.
What is ICE and how are its priorities changing?
Already, Trump is repeating a playbook he used in his first administration to get around the congressional appropriations process.
With another measure signed last week, Trump declared a national emergency at the border, in effort to direct military resources towards border security.
Trump faced lawsuits when he used a similar maneuver during his first term to funnel Defense Department funding towards building a border wall.
Courts may be more willing to defer to this kind of gambit than other Trump efforts to get around federal law, said Matthew Lindsay, a University of Baltimore School of Law professor.
He noted, however, that the immigration crisis is not what it was 2023 in, as the numbers of border crossing have dropped considerably since that highpoint.
“Lurking behind this, there is a real separation of powers question about what extent courts are going to be keeping Congress involved in the types of appropriations decisions Congress passes,” he said.
A key question underlying Trump’s strategy will be whether courts believe they can review a president’s determination that an influx of migrants can qualify as an “invasion” or if they see that as the type of “political question” they have no power to decide.
If they chose the latter course, “that would give the president a blank check to declare an invasion pretty much anytime he wants, and then use that to suspend everyone’s civil liberties,” Somin said.
One prominent judge has recently floated the idea.
In a 5th US Circuit Court of Appeals ruling last summer siding with Texas in a dispute with the Biden administration over buoys the state placed in the Rio Grande, Judge James Ho wrote a partial dissent that seemed to embrace an invasion justification being put forward by the state, while describing the invasion determination as a political question that was not up courts to decide.
Judge blocks Trump’s ‘blatantly unconstitutional’ executive order that aims to end birthright citizenship
“Ho is the only federal judge, of the ones who have considered the issue, to have to some extent, at least, endorsed the invasion argument,” Somin said.
“Everyone else has rejected it.”
Ho, seen as on the shortlist for possible Supreme Court nominees if Trump is given an opening on the high court, also recently floated the invasion idea as a possible exception to the principle of birthright citizenship, which Trump is trying to end for children born to undocumented immigrants or temporary visa holders.
Supporters of Trump’s agenda are confident courts will defer to his determination that an invasion is occurring at the southern border.
Other legal experts who are more skeptical say the context in which he is making the argument will likely matter a great deal.
“It may just depend on their appetite for just standing by and allowing the administration to accumulate these instances of unchecked authority,” Lindsay said.
