Border czar Tom Homan discusses comments from former Homeland Security Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas on sanctuary cities and what he would have done differently in the Biden administration.
The number of illegal immigrantsin the U.S. is estimated to have surged to more than 18 million after the Biden-era border crisis, according to a new research report by a hawkish immigration group, which also found an 11% increase in less than two years.
The report was produced by the Federation for American Immigration Reform (FAIR), which argues for lower levels of immigration overall.
It estimates that, as of March 2025, there are approximately 18.6 million illegal immigrants living in the U.S.
That is 11% higher than an estimate the group published inJune 2023, when it found that there were 16.8 million illegal immigrants.
Overall, it estimates that the population has grown by 4.1 million or 28.2% since December 2020.
VANCE TAKES VICTORY LAP IN BORDER VISIT AS ILLEGAL IMMIGRANT NUMBERS PLUMMET
"As of 2025, American population growth comes almost entirely from unsustainably high levels of immigration, both legal and illegal," the report says.
FAIR estimates that there were around 11.7 million illegal immigrants in 2013.
The group includes, as an illegal immigrant, anyone who does not have legal status like a visa or permanent residency, and notably also includes those who may be in the country illegally but given a lawful presence, like Temporary Protected Status or humanitarian parole.
The Biden administration dramatically expanded the use ofhumanitarian paroleas a way to curb skyrocketing illegal border crossings.
It allowed migrants to cross the border after scheduling an appointment on the CBP One app for parole, and had parole programs where migrants could fly in having obtained travel authorization.
FAIR argues that even though they are described as having a "lawful presence," they do not have legal status and therefore cannot be counted as being in the country legally.
"Counting individuals in these situations as ‘legal immigrants’ or ‘lawful residents’ would be both incorrect and a biased mischaracterization of immigration law," the group argues.
The report estimates the total number of illegal immigrants by using Census Data and compensating for what it argues is a history of undercounting those who arrive illegally, calculating an undercount of around 40%.
The report also concedes that "estimating the size, distribution, and characteristics of the illegal alien population is an inexact science."
"In truth, we do not know exactly how many people cross the border illegally and evade immigration authorities, nor can anyone accurately quantify overstays or gotaways.
We can only estimate these figures based on annual and monthly census data," the report says.
It argues that key factors driving the surge in numbers were Biden-era policies, including at the border, the release of migrants into the U.S. and what it claims was an "abuse" of parole authority.
The Trump administration, which took office in January, has reversed anumber of Biden policiesand has shut down the parole policies and the use of the CBP One app.
It has also launched a mass deportation campaign in the interior, while also deploying the military to the border and declaring a national emergency.
The administration has since been touting a sharp drop in numbers at the border.
In February, there were just 8,326 southern border encounters, down from 189,913 in February 2024.
The administration has so far removed more than 55,000 illegal immigrants from the U.S.
"Within hours of taking the oath of office, I declared a national emergency on oursouthern borderand I deployed the U.S. military and Border Patrol to repel the invasion of our country.
And what a job they've done.
As a result, illegal border crossings last month were by far the lowest ever recorded, ever," President Donald Trump said on Tuesday.
"They heard my words, and they chose not to come."
DOJ launches probe into allegations NJ governor, AG are harboring illegals
Acting U.S. Attorney for New Jersey Alina Habba announced a probe into the state's Democratic Gov. Phil Murphy this week after he ordered state police not to cooperate with federal immigration enforcement.
"[US Attorney General] Pam Bondi has made it clear, and so has our president, that we are to take all criminals, violent criminals and criminals, out of this country and to completely enforce federal law," Habba told Fox News' Sean Hannity on his primetime show Thursday.
Habba said the investigation will look at Murphy as well as New Jersey Attorney General Matt Platkin over alleged instructions to state police not to cooperate with any federal agencies on immigration enforcement.
Under a 2018 "Immigrant Trust Directive" issued by former New JerseyAttorney General Gurbir Grewal, "voluntary cooperation" between state and local police with federal authorities is limited – ostensibly so that illegals who are the victims of crimes are not afraid to report incidents to police.
While handcuffing state police on immigration enforcement, Platkin has also ordered an investigation into the department led by Obama-appointee Preet Bharara into allegations that they slowed down traffic enforcement after being accused – by Platkin's office – of racial profiling.
Some other states, cities and police departments around the country have adopted similar measures against assisting with "administrative warrants" for civil violations of immigration law, but say they will fully cooperate with federal authorities on "judicial warrants," which are issued in active criminal cases.
However, the Trump administration says it is targeting known criminals for deportation, and not everyone with a criminal history has an active judicial warrant.
On March 26, ICE Enforcement and Removal Operations agents announced the arrest of a convicted Chinese spy a year after his trial.
Jose Ibarra, the Venezuelan illegal convicted of killing Georgia nursing student Laken Riley, had multiple run-ins with U.S. law enforcement in at least two states before he murdered her.
He had been released from custody at least once before ICE could lodge a detainer request with the NYPD.
Trump campaigned on putting an end to unvetted illegal immigration and deporting known criminals, highlighting cases like Riley's, Rachel Morin's and Jocelyn Nungaray's.
The suspect in Morin's rape and murder, Victor Antonio Martinez-Hernandez, iscurrently on trialin Maryland.
At the time of her death, he was suspected of another woman's murder in El Salvador.
Before his arrest, he was also accused of raping a California woman and her nine-year-old daughter.
DOGE exposed how Biden manipulated our immigration asylum system
Founder and President of International Network of Hearts Alma Tucker joins ‘America Reports’ to discuss border safe houses seeing fewer trafficking victims since the Trump administration took office.
Elon Musk, Antonio Gracias and the DOGE teamrecently exposedhow rampant immigration fraud and government corruption became under the Biden administration.
Specifically, they showed how aliens "getting" asylum can receive work authorization and, with it, an automatic Social Security number, which enables them to obtain driver’s licenses, commit voter fraud and receive other benefits.
This already sounds alarming.
But the truth is even worse.
Under current U.S. regulations, asylum applicants can apply for a workauthorization document with the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) five months after their asylum application is filed (rather than five months after it’s granted).
There’s no filing fee for asylum applications – meaning there is literally no cost involved in applying.
ICE SAYS IT DEPORTED 174 CRIMINAL MIGRANTS FROM TEXAS, INCLUDING A MAN WITH 39 ILLEGAL ENTRIES
This creates a huge incentive for inadmissible aliens to file fraudulent asylum applications to gain U.S. work authorization.
Venezuelan migrants flown from Guantanamo Bay via Honduras walk up a ladder after arriving on a deportation flight at Simon Bolivar International Airport in Venezuela, Feb. 20, 2025.
And while adjudicating theasylum application can take DHSor the Justice Department years to complete, the DHS prioritizes granting employment authorization applications, averaging mere months to complete such applications.
In other words, individuals can fraudulently apply for asylum and then receive work authorization shortly after, safe in the knowledge that their asylum application may not be decided for years.
Asylum was created to protect the persecuted.
But this system means it’s more prone to be exploited by inadmissible aliens as a way to get work authorizations, Social Security numbers, driver’s licenses and other government benefits.
As a result, the system is being flooded.
Under the Biden administration, so many employment documents were issued to immigration parolees (without congressional authorization), asylum applicants and other temporary aliens that DHS could not keep up with renewing the authorizations.
To "solve" the problem, Biden’s DHS finalized arulein December 2024 to permanently increase the automatic extension period for expiring employment authorization from six months to 18 months.
That is, DHS chose to automatically extend work authorization without ever considering whether the aliens should continue to have it.
According to one chart (shown by DOGE’s Gracias at a recent Wisconsin town hall), 270,000 new aliens were issued Social Security numbers in FY2021.
That number rose to 590,000 in FY22, 964,000 in FY23, and approximately 2.1 million in FY24.
According to Gracias, the Social Security Administration automatically mails aliens Social Security numbers – without requiring them to prove their identity or complete an interview.
Gracias says "The defaults in the system from Social Security to all the benefit programs have been set to max inclusion, max pay for these people.
President Joe Biden's administration ensured the asylum system maximized aid to illegal immigrants.
During its investigations, DOGE found 1.3 million aliens who were already receiving Medicaid.
They also found among the millions a subset who were registered to vote – and some who did indeed vote.
All this is the result of broad administrative state abuse of alien work authorization – something Congress needs to end by reclaiming its own constitutional authority and by returning asylum (our nation’s second-most important immigration benefit, after U.S.
citizenship) back to its intended role of protecting people from persecution.
Specifically, Congress should legislate the principle that immigration benefit applicants (including those receiving asylum) may not receive work authorization until the underlying benefit (e.g., asylum) is granted, not just filed.
While waiting for their applications to be adjudicated, applicants should fund their stay in the U.S. via a sponsor responsible for their financial well-being.
Congress should also enact anti-fraud asylum measures, which would significantly decrease the number of fraudulent asylum applications – and, by extension, would decrease the years-long wait for DHS and DOJ to adjudicate legitimate asylum applications.
DOGE can also step in and examine immigration benefit applications at DHS and DOJ to identify fraudulent applications and remove them from the 9.4 million and nearly 3.7 million respective agency backlogs.
This would decrease the processing times for the remaining valid applications and restore integrity to our lawful immigration process.
Finally, DOGE should set automatic notifications across the benefits lifecycle so that when a non-citizen is denied an immigration benefit, downstream systems and parties are likewise notified to terminate their respective benefits.
Under this system, if an alien’s asylum application or employment authorization application were denied or terminated, the alien’s employer, ICE, SSA, the Internal Revenue Service, and the alien’s state(s) of residence would be notified to ensure the alien was no longer working, receiving benefits or voting – and, ultimately, that he was removed from the country.
By acting now, DOGE and Congress can decrease the deportable alien population, ensure U.S. taxpayer benefits go to Americans first, and incentivize better compliance with our generous immigration laws.
Trump order turns federal land at US border into military installation
Attorney General Pam Bondi joins 'Fox & Friends' to discuss the U.S. Supreme Court's ruling, share the administration's reaction and explain the decision to pull more than $1.5 million in federal funding from Maine's Department of Corrections.
The U.S. military will take control of a strip of federal land that spans three states along the southern border in an effort to stem illegal immigration, a memorandum Friday byPresident Donald Trumpsaid.
The memorandum, "Military Mission forSealing the Southern Borderof the United States and Repelling Invasions," directs the secretaries of Defense, Interior, Agriculture and Homeland Security "to provide for the use and jurisdiction by the Department of Defense over such Federal lands, including the Roosevelt Reservation and excluding Federal Indian Reservations, that are reasonably necessary to enable military activities."
He wrote it could include "border-barrier construction and emplacement of detection and monitoring equipment."
Marine Corps troops weld and install concertina wire along the U.S.-Mexico Tijuana-San Diego Beach border last month.(Carlos Moreno/Anadolu via Getty Images)
"Our southern border is under attack from a variety of threats," Trump wrote in the memorandum.
"The complexity of the current situation requires that our military take a more direct role in securing our southern border than in the recent past."
The federal land, which consists of a narrow, 60-foot-deep strip at the border within the Roosevelt Reservation, would become a "military installation" designated as "National Defense Areas" where "military activities" would occur.
"Our southern border is under attack from a variety of threats," Trump wrote in the memorandum.
"The complexity of the current situation requires that our military take a more direct role in securing our southern border than in the recent past."
The Roosevelt Reservation covers California, New Mexico and Arizona and was designated as federal land by Theodore Roosevelt in 1907 to keep the border secure.
The memorandum added that the secretary of defense can "determine those military activities that are reasonably necessary and appropriate to accomplish the mission" of keeping the border secure.
The Roosevelt Reservation covers California, New Mexico and Arizona and was designated as federal land by Theodore Roosevelt in 1907 to keep the border secure.
Trump admin scores win as judge clears way for ICE enforcement in churches
Fox News correspondent Danamarie McNicholl reports on how local law enforcement in Florida is helping with deportations on ‘Special Report.’
A federal judge has upheld aTrump administrationpolicy that allows U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) to carry out enforcement operations at churches and other places of worship despite lawsuits against it from faith-based groups.
U.S. District Judge Dabney Friedrich, appointed by Trump during his first term, denied a request from more than two dozen Christian and Jewish organizations to block the policy.
The groups said it infringeson religious freedomsand is causing drops in attendance, especially among immigrants worried about being detained by ICE.
The court found little evidence that ICE is targeting churches or that the change in policy is solely to blame for fewer people attending services.
Friedrich noted that only a few enforcement actions have actually taken place at or near religious sites.
"That evidence suggests that congregants are staying home to avoid encountering ICE in their own neighborhoods, not because churches or synagogues are locations of elevated risk," Friedrich wrote in her opinion.
The policy at the center of the lawsuit took effect Jan. 20, Trump’s first day back in office.
On that day, the Department of Homeland Security rescinded an Obama-era guideline that had discouraged ICE agents from making arrests in "sensitive locations," including schools, hospitals and places of worship.
Under the new rule, ICE officers no longer need special approval to act at these locations as long as they apply "common sense" and "discretion."
Religious leaders said that change went against more than three decades of precedent, whichaimed to protect immigrantsand other vulnerable populations from being targeted at sacred or essential community spaces.
The court found little evidence that ICE is targeting churches.(ICE)
The judge, however, said bringing back the old policy might not change attendance numbers, since broader immigration enforcement actions could still keep people away.
Other legal challenges to immigration enforcement in sensitive locations are also making their way through the courts.
A federal judge in Maryland temporarily blocked operations at religious sites for some groups, including Quakers.
But a judge in Colorado ruled in the administration’s favor in a similar case involving enforcement at schools.
President Donald Trump speaks during an event on energy production in the East Room of the White House April 8, 2025, in Washington.
Supreme Court orders return of Maryland man wrongly deported to El Salvador
Sen. Eric Schmitt, R-Mo., discusses efforts to deport illegal migrants under the Trump administration on 'The Ingraham Angle.'
The Supreme Court on Thursday upheld a lower court's decision to facilitate the return of Kilmar Abrego Garcia, aSalvadoran national living in Maryland,from an El Salvador prison where federal officials sent hundreds of suspected criminals and gang members in March.
Abrego Garcia, 29, was deported to the El Salvadoran megaprison last month for being an allegedMS-13 gang member,but his attorneys maintain he does not have any gang ties.
U.S. District Judge Paula Xinis ordered federal officials to coordinate his return back to Maryland in a Monday order, calling his deportation "wholly unlawful." On Thursday, the Supreme Court sided with Xinis.
"On March 15, 2025, the United States removed Kilmar Armando Abrego Garcia from the United States to El Salvador, where he is currently detained in the Center for Terrorism Confinement (CECOT)," the order states.
"The United States acknowledges that Abrego Garcia was subject to a withholding order forbidding his removal to El Salvador, and that the removal to El Salvador was therefore illegal."
This undated photo provided by Murray Osorio PLLC shows Kilmar Abrego Garcia.
Justice Sonia Sotomayor said she "would have declined to intervene in this litigation and denied the application in full."
"Nevertheless, I agree with the Court’s order that the proper remedy is to provide Abrego Garcia with all the processes to which he would have been entitled had he not been unlawfully removed to El Salvador," Sotomayor wrote.
"That means the Government must comply with its obligation to provide Abrego Garcia with ‘due process of law,’ including notice and an opportunity to be heard, in any future proceedings."
The High Courtfurther said it "properly requires the government to 'facilitate' Abrego Garcia's release from custody in El Salvador and to ensure that his case is handled as it would have been had he not been improperly sent to El Salvador."
In this undated photo provided by the U.S. District Court for the District of Maryland, a man identified by Jennifer Vasquez Sura as her husband, Kilmar Abrego Garcia, is led by force by guards through the Terrorism Confinement Center in Tecoluca, El Salvador.
The Justice Department responded to the order in a statement to Fox News in a statement.
"As the Supreme Court correctly recognized, it is the exclusive prerogative of the President to conduct foreign affairs," the statement says.
"By directly noting the deference owed to the Executive Branch, this ruling once again illustrates that activist judges do not have the jurisdiction to seize control of the President’s authority to conduct foreign policy."
Federal court filings showed Abrego Garcia had fled El Salvador to escape gang violence.
Starting around 2006, gang members "stalked, hit, and threatened to kidnap and kill him in order to coerce his parents to succumb to their increasing demands for extortion."
He entered theUnited Statesillegally in 2011 and traveled to Maryland, where his older brother, a U.S. citizen, lived.
Jennifer Vasquez Sura, the wife of Kilmar Abrego Garcia of Maryland, who was mistakenly deported to El Salvador, speaks during a news conference at CASA's Multicultural Center in Hyattsville, Md., Friday, April 4, 2025.
Around 2016, Abrego Garcia became romantically involved with a female U.S. citizen — Jennifer Vasquez Sura — and her two children, also U.S. citizens.
They moved in together and the woman became pregnant with his child.
Abrego Garcia worked in the construction industry to support his family, court filings say.
On March 28, 2019, Abrego Garcia went to a Home Depot in Hyattsville, Maryland, to solicit employment and was recruited by three other men.
Prince George County Police Department soon arrived at the scene and detained all four men.
A prison guard transfers deportees from the U.S. to the Terrorism Confinement Center in Tecoluca, El Salvador, on Sunday.
"At the police station, the four young men were placed into different rooms and questioned.
Plaintiff Abrego Garcia was asked if he was a gang member; when he told police he was not, they said that they did not believe him and repeatedly demanded that he provide information about other gang members," court documents state.
"The police told Plaintiff Abrego Garcia that he would be released if he cooperated, but he repeatedly explained that he did not have any information to give because he did not know anything."
A judge later granted his release, and Abrego Garcia married his now-wife in 2019.
He did, however, miss the birth of his child while in federal custody, the federal complaint says.
Abrego Garcia was arrested in Baltimore on March 12 after he worked a shift as a sheet metal apprentice in Baltimore and picked up his now-5-year-old son, who has autism and other disabilities, from his grandmother’s house, the complaint says.
ICE highlights arrests of 5 illegal aliens convicted of violent crimes
'The Five' co-host Judge Jeanine Pirro breaks down the media siding with alleged Venezuelan gang members over border security on 'Jesse Watters Primetime.'
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement agents across the country arrestedmultiple illegal alienspreviously convicted of violent crimes, including ones of a sexual nature against children, this week.
In an internal bulletin shared with Fox News, ICE highlighted five major arrests made on Wednesday in Houston, Los Angeles, Chicago and New Orleans.
All five convicted criminals, which consist of four men and one woman, arecitizens of Mexicoand are in the U.S. illegally.
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement highlighted five arrests made by agents across the United States on Wednesday in a daily bulletin released to Fox News' Bill Melugin.(Immigration and Customs Enforcement)
In Chicago, ICE agents arrested 35-year-old Roberto Salvador-Casimiro, who was convicted of predatorycriminal sexual assaultof a child in Cook County, Illinois.
ICE Houston made two major arrests in 23-year-old Jesus Guadalupe Salazar, who has convictions in Hidalgo County, Texas, for assaulting a pregnant woman and continuous violence against a family member, and 67-year-old Pedro Esparza Castellano, who was convicted in Tarrant County, Texas, of indecency with child contact.
Pedro Contreras-Soto, 54, who has been convicted in San Jose, California, of rape of spouse by threat, sodomy with a child under 14 years old or with force, and kidnapping, was arrested by ICE Los Angeles agents.
Lastly, ICE New Orleans arrested Ana Karen Zaragozaz Saenz, a 35-year-old woman who has beenconvicted in multiple U.S. states of possession of fraudulent documents, obstructing justice, larceny, felony assault, misdemeanor DUI, smuggling aliens and felony stolen property.
ICE reported in its most recent data on March 26 that there were 47,892 illegal immigrants convicted of a crime currently detained at a facility in the U.S.(Christopher Dilts/Bloomberg via Getty Images)
The latest data provided by ICE to lawmakers in September 2024 showed there were 425,431 illegal immigrants convicted of crimes roaming the streets in the U.S.
As of March 26, ICE reported there were 47,892 illegal immigrants convicted of a crime currently detained at a facility in the U.S.
ICE reveals sanctuary jurisdictions that have released the most criminal aliens
Fox News' Lawrence Jones breaks down the latest sanctuary policy data on "Fox & Friends," and Jessica Vaughan discusses the findings of her report that reveals which sanctuary cities released thousands of criminals.
New U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) agency records show that more than 25,000 of the agency’s detainer requests were declined by sanctuary jurisdictions throughout the country over the last few years, resulting in the release of dozens ofillegal immigrantsconvicted of homicide.
A total of 72 criminal aliens withhomicide convictions or chargeswere released from U.S. jails despite having ICE detainers between Oct. 1, 2022, and Feb. 6, 2025, according to ICE data provided to the Center for Immigration Studies (CIS), which tracks the immigration laws of states and local municipalities.
Seventeen of those releases came from just three detention centers: the Illinois River Corrections Center and Santa Clara County jails, which released six, and the Stateville Correctional Center in Illinois, which released five.
The data comes as debate over "sanctuary" jurisdictions, those that limit or ban local cooperation with federal immigration authorities, has intensified asPresident Donald Trumphas doubled down on his campaign promise of mass deportations.
Trump has hinted at federal action against the jurisdictions in recent weeks, including a Truth Social post Thursday in which the president threatened to withhold federal funding.
"No more Sanctuary Cities!
They protect the Criminals, not the Victims," Trump wrote in the post.
"They are disgracing our Country, and are being mocked all over the World.
Working on papers to withhold all Federal Funding for any City or State that allows these Death Traps to exist!!!"
Meanwhile, the ICE data provided insight into which jurisdictions were the least compliant with the agency’s detainer requests.
Those numbers show that more than half (52%) of the declined detainer requests were from jails inCalifornia, which is considered a sanctuary state by CIS.
Other states with a large share of declined detainers were Illinois, Virginia, Massachusetts and Connecticut.
Illinois, Massachusetts and Connecticut are all sanctuary states, according to CIS, while Virginia does not have a statewide sanctuary policy but is home to dozens of jurisdictions with their own such policies.
"It’s shocking that over half of the declined detainers were refused by jails and prisons in California," Alfonso Aguilar, the director of Hispanic engagement at the American Principles Project, told Fox News Digital.
"Gov. [Gavin] Newsom and mayors in the state have a lot of explaining to do to their constituents."
Newsom’s office did not immediately respond to a Fox News Digital request for comment.
The main jail in Santa Clara County was responsible for the highest number of declined detainers, the ICE data showed, with nearly 3,000 criminal aliens being released during the 2022-2025 period.
Gov. Gavin Newsom has overseen the sanctuary state of California, the state with the highest portion of declined ICE detainers.(Getty Images)
Cook County Jail in Illinois and Fairfax County Adult Detention Center in Virginia were also responsible for a large share of released criminal aliens, with both declining more than 1,000 ICE detainers during the same period.
"What’s happening in these jurisdictions is unconscionable," Aguilar said.
"Their leaders evidently don’t believe that illegal immigrants that have been charged or convicted with crimes should be removed from their communities.
And by ignoring ICE detainers and releasing them into the community, they’re putting in danger the lives and property of their citizens."
Blue city mayor under fire for trying to halt reopening of ICE facility
Virginia Gov. Glenn Youngkin joins 'Fox & Friends' to discuss the commonwealth's effort to work with the Trump administration to get violent illegal immigrants off the streets and his reaction to President Trump's tariff pause.
The City of Newark and itsDemocratic mayorare facing pushback after filing a legal complaint against Immigration and Customs Enforcement for reopening a building to prep illegal immigrants for deportation without "following proper building safety protocols."
Mayor Ras Baraka said in a statement that using the building, Delaney Hall, for processing people in the country illegally goes against state and local law, leading the city to file a lawsuit in the Essex County Superior Court at the end of March.
"The City was informed that construction work is taking place in the building without required permits," the mayor stated.
"The Department of Engineering imposed a stop work order to halt any and all construction on the site today.
Two ICE officials and the GEO Group facility director on site were made aware of the violations."
"In addition, ICE has failed to apply for construction permits, continued certificates of occupancy, and requests to change the building’s use," he added.
Delaney Hall has just under 1,200 beds, according to USA Today.
Homeland Security Secretary Kristi Noem watches a vehicle scan during a tour of the San Ysidro Port of Entry, in San Diego, March 16, 2025.
"The agreement between ICE and the GEO Group to use Delaney Hall with the intention of incarcerating and holding immigrants slated for deportation does not supersede the ordinances and procedures legislated by the City of Newark and the State of New Jersey." the Democrat continued.
"As I have stated in the past, without compliance with requirements, Delaney Hall cannot lawfully open.
We will not tolerate federal attempts to ignore or evade our laws and statutes, which apply to everyone."
The contractor who runs Delaney Hall, the GEO Group, said this is a political tactic and could put jobs andcommunity safety"in jeopardy."
"The attempt by local and state officials to stop the opening of a lawful federal immigration processing center at the Delaney Hall facility in Newark is another unfortunate example of a politicized campaign by sanctuary city and open borders politicians in New Jersey to interfere with the federal government’s efforts to arrest, detain, and deport dangerous criminal illegal aliens in accordance with established federal law," a spokesperson for the group told Fox News Digital.
Newark Mayor Ras Baraka speaks after the Democratic gubernatorial debate at Rider University in Lawrenceville, New Jersey, on Feb. 2, 2025.
"These politically motivated tactics threaten both public safety and the local economy and are based on bogus claims about the Delaney Hall facility, which previously operated as a federal immigration processing center for six years under President Obama’s administration, without opposition from local political leaders," the statement continued.
Immigration and Customs Enforcement did not respond in time for publication.
Baraka, who's running for governor, criticized anICE raidin the city in January, which led to the arrest of eight individuals.
"The problem with this is that none of these people were rapists, or murderers or criminals," Baraka said at the time.
"The problem with it is that ICE went in there without a warrant."
"We don't want an ICE detention in Newark.
What we are concerned about is the erosion of the Constitution," he added.
New Jersey state laws onillegal immigrantshave continued to spark pushback among Republicans, as state police were directed not to pay attention to warrants requested by the federal government for immigration enforcement purposes, according to an email obtained by Jack Ciattarelli's gubernatorial campaign and reviewed by Fox News Digital.
"The fact that my campaign received this email is evidence that brave and courageous law enforcement officers throughout New Jersey are angry about being handcuffed by liberal Democrat policies in Trenton, making our communities less safe," Ciattarelli, aRepublican, said in a statement.
Florida’s largest Venezuelan stronghold poised to join forces with ICE: report
Fox News' Madeleine Rivera provides details on the upcoming White House meeting between President Donald Trump and El Salvador's President Nayib Bukele.
The city ofDoral, Florida, a key hub for Venezuelan immigrants, is poised to ink an agreement with U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) that would allow the city’s law enforcement to carry out some immigration-enforcement operations.
Members of the Doral City Council are expected to authorize a partnership with ICE through the 287(g) program on Wednesday, which would allow Doral police officers to carry out limited immigration enforcement, such as detentions, questioning and processing those suspected of breaking federal immigration laws, according to areport by the Miami Herald.
The news comes as PresidentDonald Trumphas continued his push to ramp up deportation efforts across the country, an effort that has included the courting of several local law enforcement agencies to assist federal immigration authorities.
The inclusion of Doral in the effort would mark a seemingly surprising turn, with the city being home to one of the largest populations of Venezuelan immigrants in the country.
That fact has sparked concern among many in the local population, most notably about potential racial profiling, though city officials have attempted to ease fears and said the partnership will focus strictly on lawful enforcement.
"The intention isn’t to detain anyone based on how they look," Council Member Rafael Pineyro told the Miami Herald.
"We are obligated to follow federal and state laws, but the goal is not to target individuals based on appearance.
Our focus remains on lawful enforcement, not profiling."
One part of the program focuses on identifying and processing illegal immigrants who are already in custody and eligible for deportation.
Another part allows for local law enforcement to support ICE deportation operations in the field.
The program permits some local law enforcement officers to participate in a 40-hour ICE training session, while also requiring that the local agencies keep in regular contact with ICE when carrying outimmigration enforcement.
Doral’s involvement in the program comes as Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis has encouraged local cooperation with federal immigration authorities.
The report notes that Florida law requires enforcement agencies in charge of county jails to be enrolled in 287(g) programs.
Local activists continue to push back against the potential agreement.
"By transforming local law enforcement into instruments of the Department of Homeland Security’s enforcement, Doral’s elected officials have broken the trust of the city’s large Venezuelan community," Adelys Ferro, the executive director of the Venezuelan American Caucus, told the Miami Herald.
"The community relies on the police for protection, not persecution."
Federal authorities charge over 800 illegal aliens with immigration crimes in 1 week
Manhattan Institute Senior Fellow Ilya Shapiro and former Principal Deputy Assistant U.S. Attorney General Tom Dupree join 'Fox News Sunday' to discuss federal courts trying to halt President Donald Trump's key executive orders.
Federal authorities representing districts along the southern border of the U.S. charged over 840 illegal immigrantswith immigration-related crimes in just the third week of March as part of Operation Take Back America.
The Department of Justice(DOJ) said Monday that it is playing a critical role in the operation, which is a nationwide initiative to fend off illegal immigration, while also eradicating cartels and transnational criminal organizations and protecting communities from violent criminals.
Specifically, in the states of Arizona, Texas, California and New Mexico, U.S. attorneys charged over 840 individuals with violating U.S. immigration laws.
In Arizona, attorneys brought immigration-related charges against 217 suspects.
Of those, the U.S. filed 91 cases involving immigrants who illegally re-entered the country, and charged 103 immigrants with illegally entering the U.S.
The U.S. DOJ said federal prosecutors along southern border states charged over 840 illegal immigrants with immigration-related crimes during the third week of March. (U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement)
The U.S. also filed 15 cases against 23 individuals accused of smuggling illegal immigrants into the U.S. through Arizona.
U.S. attorneys in Central California filed charges against 17 individuals accused of illegally re-entering the U.S. after being removed, many of whom had been previously convicted of felony crimes, including assault, before being removed from the U.S.
One suspect facing additional crimes is suspected of murder, and another was arrested on suspicion of committing assault with intent to rape, the DOJ said.
ICE is conducting flights to remove illegal immigrants from the U.S. and back to their home countries.(ICE Seattle)
If an illegal immigrant returns to the U.S. after being removed, they could face up to two years in federal prison, but if they are convicted of a felony and return to the U.S., they could face between 10 and 20 years in federal prison.
The DOJ said the Southern District of California filed over 90 border-related cases, including transporting illegal aliens into the U.S., bringing immigrants into the U.S. for financial gain, re-entering the U.S. after being deported and importing controlled substances into the U.S.
Forty-six individuals were charged with re-entering the U.S. in New Mexico, four were charged with alien smuggling, and 27 were charged with illegal entry.
PRESIDENT TRUMP COMFORTS MOTHER WHOSE SON DIED OF FENTANYL POISONING: ‘UP THERE WATCHING YOU’
Under the Biden administration, Eagle Pass, Texas, had been a hot spot for illegal immigrants to enter the U.S.
Texas saw the highest number of charges against illegal aliens, with 246 being filed in theSouthern District of Texas, and 210 being filed in the Western District of Texas.
"We are grateful for the hard work of our border prosecutors in bringing these cases and helping to make our border safe again," the DOJ said.
Last week, U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement Agency (ICE) agents and other federal enforcement authorities arrested 81 illegal aliens as part of Operation Take Back America in Kentucky.
ICE and the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) are close to reaching an agreement that would allow ICE to access taxpayer information to locate illegal immigrants subject to deportation.
The historic agreement would allow ICE to submit the names and addresses of illegal immigrants to cross-check against IRS tax records, which is a shift in longstanding IRS policy aimed at keeping taxpayer information strictly confidential, according to a report by the Washington Post.
The news comes as President Donald Trumphas continued to ramp up the deportation effort he promised on the campaign trail, with the president attempting to use every available resource in order to aid immigration officials.
New Florida Attorney General outlines goal for his time in office
Florida Attorney General James Uthmeier speaks with Fox News Digital about how he plans to make the state the safest in the country.
EXCLUSIVE–Not even three months into the job, Florida Attorney General James Uthmeier says it is his goal to make Florida the safest state in the nation to raise a family.
"My big agenda is really focused on delivering on the agenda set forth by President Trump and Governor DeSantis, and that starts with immigration," Uthmeier toldFox News Digitalin an interview on Tuesday.
Uthmeier was appointed by Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis and sworn in on February 17 to fill the vacancy created byformer Attorney General Ashley Moody, who DeSantis selected to fill Sen.
Marco Rubio’s Senate seat following his departure to serve as President Donald Trump’s Secretary of State.
The 37-year-old attorney general said he has worked with the Florida legislature to give new authorities to the state’s law enforcement officers, allowing them to be "certified, trained and deputized by ICE and Homeland Security to work alongside the feds to detain people that are in this state unlawfully."
FLORIDA OFFICIALS DIVIDED OVER ICE DEPORTATION DEAL AIMED AT CRIMINAL ALIENS: ‘EMBARRASSED FOR OUR CITY’
Florida Attorney General James Uthmeier says it is his goal to make Florida the safest state in the nation, with immigration being the top concern.
One of the youngest attorneys general in Florida’s history, Uthmeier said illegal immigration has taken a toll on his state.
"We've also seen significant harms to our economy, where people [are] unlawfully here in this state, our taxing, our infrastructure, our education systems, and our healthcare systems.
So we believe in rule of law," Uthmeier said.
"We believe in sovereignty.
We want to make sure that the state of Florida is protecting our families against the dangers of illegal immigration and all the other vices and criminalities that go along with it."
Most of the time under former President Joe Biden’sadministration, Uthmeier said, illegal immigrants had committed crimes and were still released.
"Floridians have been seriously impacted by the immigration crisis," he added.
"Over the last calendar year, we've had dozens of very serious crimes ranging from murder to sexual assaults of seniors, of children, and other serious felonies," the Florida Attorney General said.
"And in almost all cases, these criminals have been in touch with our criminal justice system.
And when they were handed over to the feds, the Biden administration and the Democrats just opened up the back door and let them back out on the streets, putting our families in jeopardy."
Fox News Digital reached out to a Biden representative for comment.
Uthmeier said that he is "excited" that this is no longer the case under Trump’s administration.
"We've given more powers to the state and to the governor where if local officials want to prevent law enforcement from working with the federal government to combat illegal immigration, that we can bring civil actions and levy penalties against these jurisdictions," Uthmeier said.
"And the governor ultimately has broader authority to remove people from office that don't want to do their job."
If they refuse, they are put "on notice."
"The city of Fort Myers was the first to reverse and say, ‘Okay, you know, we're going to help our law enforcement officers to cooperate,'" Uthmeier said.
Recently, several Fort Myers, Florida, City Council memberswere in tearsduring a March 20 meeting leading up to the vote on the partnership between ICE and their local police working together to apprehend illegal immigrants.
Councilmember Darla Bonk wipes a tear from her eye while speaking against the memorandum of agreement between United States Immigration and Customs Enforcement and the Fort Myers Police Department during a city council meeting at Fort Myers City Hall in Fort Myers, Florida on March 17, 2025.
Bonk voted against the memo.
Fort Myers Mayor Kevin Andersonsaid he was "disappointed" and "embarrassed" by the council members' opposition to the vote, which resulted in a tie.
The Fort Myers City Council laterreversed courseand passed the measure unanimously.
"I know Jacksonville recently decided to support this law," Uthmeier said.
"I know some others are ‘talking the talk’ that they might not cooperate, but we will ensure that they are held accountable."
Another priority for Uthmeier in making Florida a safe place to raise a family is combating the sexual exploitation of children.
"My first day on the job, I told our team, I want to do everything I can to prioritize getting these demented individuals off the streets," Uthmeier said.
"Somebody's trying to prey upon kids through social media, which is very prevalent.
If people are trying to traffic our kids, if people are trying to engage in the sale of child pornography, we are going to go after them with the full force of law, and I hope these individuals don't see the sunlight ever again."
He said a recent bust of an international child pornography ring was especially gruesome.
"They were selling over a million videos and images," Uthmeier said.
"Words in the English language cannot describe the gruesome nature of the sexual assault that was going on, hurting kids and even babies in these images."
"We busted this ring," Uthmeier said.
"We're continuing to investigate.
Anybody that's engaged in this type of behavior is going to face the full force of the law in Florida and my office's wrath."
The father of threesaid Florida will not be"lenient at all" in prosecuting child sex offenders, adding, "We're going to protect our kids and we're gonna keep our state safe, strong and free."
Florida Attorney General James Uthmeier says he wants to make Florida a state where innocent people won't be prosecuted.
In terms of making Florida a fair state to live in, Uthmeier said that his team is fighting against wrongful prosecution of innocent people.
"Our office is going to fight back against lawfare and the dangers that it presents," Uthmeier said.
"We have filed many briefs in federal court to defend the actions of President Trump, to defend his ability to fire senior ranking officials in the administration that don't want to do their jobs, that don't want to adhere to his mission."
He added that he thinks it’s "ridiculous" that the courts can keep the President of the United States from firing bureaucrats.
"We also have disagreed strongly with the efforts of district judges across the country to try to impose their own political preferences for the executive power decisions of the president that the Constitution, you know, clearly delineates fall with the president," Uthmeier said.
"Here at the local level, where we've had state attorneys in Orlando and other jurisdictions that don't want to impose sentences, that don't want to bring cases against serious offenders, including murderers, we hold them accountable.
We take action.
I'm going to be including my oversight authority to ensure that cases get brought where needed."
The end result, he hopes, is a thriving place for families.
"Here in Florida, we're at a 50-year crime low," Uthmeier said.
"That's not going to stop.
We've become the number one destination in the country for a reason.
People want to settle here and bring their families here because it's safe.
And under my watch as attorney general, that's never going to change."
ICE reveals sanctuary jurisdictions that have released the most criminal aliens
Fox News' Lawrence Jones breaks down the latest sanctuary policy data on "Fox & Friends," and Jessica Vaughan discusses the findings of her report that reveals which sanctuary cities released thousands of criminals.
New U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) agency records show that more than 25,000 of the agency’s detainer requests were declined by sanctuary jurisdictions throughout the country over the last few years, resulting in the release of dozens ofillegal immigrantsconvicted of homicide.
A total of 72 criminal aliens withhomicide convictions or chargeswere released from U.S.
jails despite having ICE detainers between Oct. 1, 2022, and Feb. 6, 2025, according to ICE data provided to the Center for Immigration Studies (CIS), which tracks the immigration laws of states and local municipalities.
Seventeen of those releases came from just three detention centers: the Illinois River Corrections Center and Santa Clara County jails, which released six, and the Stateville Correctional Center in Illinois, which released five.
THOUSANDS LEAVE COUNTRY VOLUNTARILY AMID TRUMP SELF-DEPORT PUSH, DHS SAYS
The data comes as debate over "sanctuary" jurisdictions, those that limit or ban local cooperation with federal immigration authorities, has intensified asPresident Donald Trumphas doubled down on his campaign promise of mass deportations.
Trump has hinted at federal action against the jurisdictions in recent weeks, including a Truth Social post Thursday in which the president threatened to withhold federal funding.
"No more Sanctuary Cities!
They protect the Criminals, not the Victims," Trump wrote in the post.
"They are disgracing our Country, and are being mocked all over the World.
Working on papers to withhold all Federal Funding for any City or State that allows these Death Traps to exist!!!"
Meanwhile, the ICE data provided insight into which jurisdictions were the least compliant with the agency’s detainer requests.
Those numbers show that more than half (52%) of the declined detainer requests were from jails inCalifornia, which is considered a sanctuary state by CIS.
IMMIGRATION THINK TANK COOKS UP SCHEME TO USE ‘SNITCHES’ TO FORCE MIGRANTS TO SELF-DEPORT
Other states with a large share of declined detainers were Illinois, Virginia, Massachusetts and Connecticut.
Illinois, Massachusetts and Connecticut are all sanctuary states, according to CIS, while Virginia does not have a statewide sanctuary policy but is home to dozens of jurisdictions with their own such policies.
"It’s shocking that over half of the declined detainers were refused by jails and prisons in California," Alfonso Aguilar, the director of Hispanic engagement at the American Principles Project, told Fox News Digital.
"Gov. [Gavin] Newsom and mayors in the state have a lot of explaining to do to their constituents."
Newsom’s office did not immediately respond to a Fox News Digital request for comment.
The main jail in Santa Clara County was responsible for the highest number of declined detainers, the ICE data showed, with nearly 3,000 criminal aliens being released during the 2022-2025 period.
Gov. Gavin Newsom has overseen the sanctuary state of California, the state with the highest portion of declined ICE detainers.(Getty Images)
Cook County Jail in Illinois and Fairfax County Adult Detention Center in Virginia were also responsible for a large share of released criminal aliens, with both declining more than 1,000 ICE detainers during the same period.
"What’s happening in these jurisdictions is unconscionable," Aguilar said.
"Their leaders evidently don’t believe that illegal immigrants that have been charged or convicted with crimes should be removed from their communities.
And by ignoring ICE detainers and releasing them into the community, they’re putting in danger the lives and property of their citizens."
FLASHBACK: Mitt Romney mocked in 2012 for self-deportation concept that has now become a reality
Border czar Tom Homan joined 'Fox & Friends' to discuss the latest on a massive ICE raid in Massachusetts, legal hurdles regarding the Alien Enemies Act and his response to a judge comparing the treatment of alleged gang members and Nazis.
PresidentDonald Trump’spush to increase the number of illegal immigrants who self-deport was originally the brainchild of former Sen. Mitt Romney, who pitched the idea of encouraging voluntary departures during his 2012 bid for president.
"The answer is self-deportation, which is people decide they can do better by going home because they can't find work here because they don't have legal documentation to allow them to work here," Romney said during a Republican primary debate in 2012, when asked how the U.S. could deport the millions of illegal immigrants in the country.
Romney was largely mocked for the idea during that campaign, including by Trump,who told Newsaxin November 2012 that Romney’s "maniacal" and "crazy" proposal had turned off Latino voters.
President Donald Trump initially mocked Mitt Romney's 2012 idea to encourage illegal immigrants to self-deport.(AP)
Fast-forward to 2025, and self-deportation has become a central theme of Trump’s effort to speed the overall number of removals, with Trump sending an Oval Office video message last month to illegal immigrants encouraging them to use the CBP Home app to voluntarily leave the country.
"Leave now and self-deport voluntarily.
If they do, they could potentially have the opportunity to return legally at some point in the future," Trump said in the video, adding that those who do not self-deport "will be found, they will be deported, and they will never be admitted again to the United States."
"Using the CBP home app to leave the United States voluntarily is the safest option for illegal aliens," Trump added.
That message has seemingly hit home over the last month, according to Department of Homeland Security Data (DHS) shared with Fox News Digital, which shows that more than5,000 peoplehave used the app to arrange their voluntary departure to the United States.
Former Sen. Mitt Romney was one of the first to advocate for encouraging self-deportation during his 2012 run for president.(Win McNamee/Getty Images)
The push to increase that number has accelerated in recent days, with the administration unveiling a new plan to fine illegal immigrants who have received a final order of removal $998 for every day they fail to comply with the order and remain in the country.
That fine is in addition to fines of $1,000-$5,000 for those who claimed they would self-deport but subsequently failed to do so.
DHS has also released a flyer spelling out the benefits of self-deportation, which boasts that illegal immigrants will be able to keep the money they earned while in the United States and retain the ability tolegally migrateto the country in the future.
President Donald Trump has made a renewed push for illegal immigrants to self-deport.(Evan Vucci/AP)
"Illegal aliens should use the CBP Home app to self-deport and leave the country now.
If they don’t, they will face the consequences," DHS Assistant Secretary Tricia McLaughlin told Fox News on Tuesday.
"This includes a fine of $998 per day for every day that the illegal alien overstayed their final deportation order."
Florida police officer injured after illegal alien crashes into patrol car
Fort Myers Mayor Kevin Anderson speaks with Fox News Digital over the city council's vote to enter an agreement with ICE to formalize local deportation efforts, after officials failed to approve the deal in a tear-filled meeting last month.
AFlorida police officeris recovering after an illegal immigrant crashed into his patrol car last week.
Belle Isle police officer Jacob Tapia was injured on April 3 after Paula Hernandez Lazaro crashed into his patrol vehicle after failing to yield while making a left turn.
Lazaro, who was driving without a license, hit Tapia's car so hard that it went off the road and collided with a tree and a fence.
The officer was treated at Orlando Regional Medical Center for minor injuries and was released the same day.
"He’s expected to make a full recovery and will be following up to ensure there are no lingering issues," the department said.
MORE THAN 900 ILLEGAL ALIENS CHARGED WITH IMMIGRATION-RELATED CRIMES DURING FIRST WEEK OF APRIL: DOJ
A police officer in Belle Isle, Florida, was injured last week when an illegal alien crashed into his patrol vehicle after failing to yield while turning left.(Belle Isle Police Department)
The department said this was the second time Lazaro was cited fordriving without a license.
Upon further investigation, Belle Isle police discovered Lazaro was in the United States illegally.
She was arrested and charged with operating a vehicle without a valid license and unauthorized entry into Florida.
Belle Isle Police Chief Travis Grimm told FOX 35 Orlando that the Florida Highway Patrol is handling the investigation.
MEXICAN MAN CONVICTED OF KILLING HIS CHILD TO BE DEPORTED AFTER ENCOUNTERING ICE OFFICERS IN MONTANA JAIL
Paula Hernandez Lazaro entered the U.S. illegally through Texas and has been living in Florida for about 11 years.(Belle Isle Police Department)
Lazaro's citizenship status was looked into when she handed a state trooper her Mexican passport without a stamp for entry into the U.S.
She has been living in Florida for about 11 years andentered the country illegallythrough Texas.
Grimm said Florida Highway Patrol troopers have undergone the training necessary to handle and arrest suspected illegal immigrants.
"FHP has gone through the training already with ICE," Grimm said.
"I don’t want to speak on their behalf, but they’ve already gotten the clearance and the latitude to be able to use those authorities."
Paula Hernandez Lazaro has been cited two times for driving without a license, Belle Isle police said.(Belle Isle Police Department)
Belle Isle policethanked the community for checking in on the injured officer over the past week.
"Your support means the world to him and to all of us.
It’s genuinely amazing to serve a community that cares so deeply about its police officers," the department wrote on Facebook.
The hottest stories ripped from the headlines, from crime to courts, legal and scandal.
Florida city passes bill criminalizing illegal entry
Fox News Digital spoke with at-large Jacksonville City Council member Nick Howland about the city's latest law criminalizing illegal immigrants.
The city ofJacksonville, Florida,ignited an immigration firestorm, criminalizing illegal entry as a city council member touted the "public safety" benefits.
Fox News Digital spoke with at-large Jacksonville City Council member Nick Howland on the city's ordinance #2025-0147, known as the Jacksonville Illegal Immigration Enforcement Act, which was passed by the city council 12-5 last week and signed into law on Tuesday.
"We are the first city in the country to enact this kind of bill," Howland said.
"We're standing with our president, with our governor, with our state legislature to secure our borders, to reverse the Biden wave of illegal immigration and to keep our streets and our neighborhoods safe."
The bill not only criminalizes illegal immigration but also allocates resources to help the Jacksonville Sheriff's Office identify individuals without legal status.
City leaders passed the Jacksonville Illegal Immigration Enforcement Act.
One of the main resources listed in the bill was a request for 25 mobile fingerprint scanners for law enforcement.
The legislation will also make it a local crime for undocumented immigrants to enter or reside in the city of Jacksonville.
First-time offenders face a mandatory 30-day jail sentence, while repeat offenders could receive up to 60 days in jail.
"There are two main parts to the bill. The first is what we've already discussed; it criminalizes entering or residing in Duval County if you are an illegal immigrant.
The second part focuses on determining whether someone is in the country illegally," he said.
Sheriff T.K. Waters said this move helps the Jacksonville Sheriff's Office.(Jacksonville Sheriff's Office)
Howland said, like mostsheriff's offices and police departments,Jacksonville uses fingerprint readers.
"This bill helps [Jacksonville] Sheriff T.K. Waters determine how many additional fingerprint readers are needed to equip every patrol unit operating 24/7 throughout the city and county," he said.
Jacksonville covers over 800 square miles, and the bill allocates $76,000 for 25 more fingerprint readers.
"That will bring the department's total to just over 150, roughly one for every patrol," he said.
"This is critical because it gives the sheriff another tool in the toolbox."
In 2024, 602 undocumented immigrants were detained in Duval County.
Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) took custody of 334 for deportation, according to the legislation, written by City Council member Kevin Carrico.
The rest either served their time or were released on bail.
Among those 334 deportation cases, there were 94 charges for battery, 140 for DUI, as well as cases involving murder andsexual assault.
"This is, at the end of the day, a public safety bill," Howland said.
"This is keeping people off the streets that would otherwise endanger our community.
And we need to know when someone is legal or illegal and the fingerprint readers help."
While proponents of the law, like Howland, have boasted about its potential impact on public safety, others have criticized it for its redundancy and the implementation of "stop and frisk" policies.
"It has always been my position that we will provide the equipment and resources they need.
So they will receive the funding for the 25 fingerprint scanners that have been requested.
I wish that alone had been all 2025-147 was," Jacksonville Mayor Donna Deegan said in a news conference.
"But it’s not.
Instead, it includes language that is hurtful and performative but not substantive," she said.
"There is nothing in this bill that isn’t already required by federal or state law.
And in fact, the state law already carries a harsher penalty.
So why would JSO need to arrest someone under a new local ordinance when they already have a stronger state law?"
Deegan noted that the city has had an agreement with ICE since 2008 and that sanctuary cities have been banned in the Sunshine State since 2019.
"Any suggestion to the contrary is intentionally misleading," she said.
"On top of it being redundant, this bill puts our local government in a lane where it doesn’t belong.
Courts have repeatedly ruled that immigration enforcement is a function of the federal government."
At-large Jacksonville City Council member Nick Howland said the legislation is "at the end of the day, a public safety bill."(Visit Jacksonville)
Howland said that even if there are already laws on the books, this adds additional support and flexibility for local police, which makes it worthwhile.
"There's nothing redundant about giving police another tool in their toolbox to ensure we have safe streets and neighborhoods," he said.
He said the new city ordinance goes a step further than state and federal laws, making it a local offense to enter or reside within Jacksonville as an illegal migrant.
It gives Jacksonville authorities more power toenforce immigration violationslocally, he said.
"This allows the Jacksonville Sheriff's Office to use the new law to detain individuals a bit longer, long enough to potentially turn them over to ICE," he said.
"Why is that important?
As I mentioned, over 600 people were detained last year, but only 334 were referred to ICE for deportation.
With this law, the sheriff's office can hold individuals longer if they've broken the law by entering the country illegally.
That means we can increase the number of cases referred to ICE for potential deportation, if necessary."
The Jacksonville Sheriff's Office saw a massive drop in violent crime in 2024.(Jacksonville Sheriff's Office)
Jacksonville Sheriff T.K.
Waters said the department has seen firsthand the consequences of "failed border policies on public safety."
"The Jacksonville Illegal Immigration Enforcement Act provides our agency with additional tools and resources to help address those threats and ensure that offenders are held accountable," he told Fox News Digital.
"Furthermore, it sends a clear message that Jacksonville will not be a sanctuary for criminals who enter our country illegally."
Illinois Dem dismisses migrant murders as 'immigrants committing a few crimes'
Illinois Rep. Jesús "Chuy" García waved away examples of violence committed by illegal immigrants as just "a few crimes."
Rep. Jesús "Chuy" García, D- Ill., appeared to dismissillegal immigrants attacking and murderingAmericans as simply "immigrants committing a few crimes" Wednesday.
Garcia made his remarks at a House Judiciary Subcommittee on Immigration Integrity, Security, and Enforcement hearing where he feigned surprise that Republicans were "scapegoat[ing] immigrants once again."
"Republicans have lifted up some tragedies that involve immigrants committing a few crimes," Garcia said, claiming Republicans were being "dishonest and cruel."
"This is the exception, not the rule," he added.
"I live in an immigrant neighborhood in Chicago.
I know what it’s like."
Rep. Jesus "Chuy" Garcia, D- Ill., spoke at the House Judiciary Subcommittee hearing on Immigration Integrity, Security, and Enforcement on Wednesday.
Just before García spoke, Rep. Jeff Van Drew, R-N.J., called out sanctuary city policies for releasing known violent criminals onto the streets with no clear oversight.
"There have been murders, there have been rapes, there have been disfigurements," Van Drew said.
He added, "We knowwhat happened to Laken Riley.
We know what's happened to so many people.
We're trying to clean up the chaos that was left behind."
Also, shortly before García made his comments, Rep. Troy Nehls, R-Texas, gave a series of examples of sanctuary cities ignoring ICE detainers on rapists and killers, many of whom went on to assault and kill again.
Illegal immigrant Jose Ibarra was found guilty on 10 counts in the death of Georgia nursing student Laken Riley in November.(Hyosub Shin/Atlanta Journal-Constitution via AP, Pool)
García also argued that sanctuary city polices, such as the ones implemented in Chicago, have produced lower crime and poverty rates.
He concluded that Republicans are "not interested in public safety or crime victims" because of how they’ve embraced President Donald Trump’s deportation policies.
Chicago Flips Red Vice President Danielle Carter-Walters responded to García during her testimony.
"It’s funny that Mr. García is from Chicago, and he cannot tell you what’s happening in our community.
If he came into our community, he would see all the gang graffiti, the Tren de Aragua signs, the MS-13.
He would see across the street in a park where they’re putting the shelters, all the needles in the park," Carter-Walters said.
She also attackedsanctuary city policiesand claimed, based on her husband’s experience as a former police officer, that crimes by illegal immigrants are often not reported.
Thousands leave country voluntarily amid Trump self-deport push
White House deputy chief of staff for policy Stephen Miller discusses the Supreme Court’s ruling to remove the block on the Trump administration from using the Alien Enemies Act to remove illegal migrants and criminals on ‘Hannity.’
FIRST ON FOX: Thousands ofillegal immigrantsfacing potential involuntary removal from the U.S. have instead opted to self-deport through an app provided by the U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP).
The number of immigrants who have opted to self-deport over the last month using the CBP Home app is over 5,000, according toDepartment of Homeland Security (DHS)data shared with Fox News Digital.
The self-deportations come as the Trump administration has ramped up a messaging campaign aimed at encouraging illegal immigrants to leave the country voluntarily, most recently releasing a flyer addressed to "illegal aliens" that threatens new fines for those who choose to remain in the U.S. despite a deportation order.
"Self-deportation is safe," the flyer reads.
"Leave on your own terms by picking your departure flight."
The flyer warns that the administration plans to start fining illegal migrants who have received a final order of removal $998 per day if they continue to stay in the country, while fines of $1,000-$5,000 could be given to those who failed to self-deport after claiming they would.
America First Legal Senior Counsel James Rogers argued that the self-deportation push is working because of the "credible threat of enforcement."
"Our nation’s immigration laws impose severe penalties on aliens who are illegally in the country.
The only reason there is a large population of illegal immigrants residing in the United States is because prior administrations have failed to enforce these laws passed by Congress," Rogers said.
"Everyone knows this, including the aliens who have been illegally living here.
The current trend of illegal aliens self-deporting proves that even just the credible threat of enforcement can be enough to get many illegal immigrants to comply with our laws and leave the country."
Meanwhile, the flyer boasts of several benefits for those who opt to self-deport, including the ability to keep the money they earned while in the U.S., future opportunities forlegal immigration, and potential financial assistance or flights out of the country for those who cannot afford it.
President Donald Trump has encouraged illegal immigrants to self-deport, claiming it is the safest way to leave the country.(Evan Vucci/AP)
"Illegal aliens should use the CBP Home app to self-deport and leave the country now.
If they don’t, they will face the consequences," Department of Homeland Security (DHS) Assistant Secretary Tricia McLaughlin told Fox News on Tuesday.
"This includes a fine of $998 per day for every day that the illegal alien overstayed their final deportation order."
President Donald Trumphimself has joined the messaging campaign, releasing a video last month that encouraged illegal migrants to use the CBP Home app to self-deport.
"Leave now and self-deport voluntarily.
If they do, they could potentially have the opportunity to return legally at some point in the future," Trump said in the video, adding that those who do not self-deport "will be found, they will be deported, and they will never be admitted again to the United States."
"Using the CBP home app to leave the United States voluntarily is the safest option for illegal aliens," Trump added, noting that self-deportation will also free up critical law enforcement resources that are better spent focusing on criminal aliens.
Venezuelan migrants walk following their arrival on a flight after being deported from the U.S., in Caracas, Venezuela, on March 24.(Reuters/Leonardo Fernandez Viloria)
Rogers argued illegal immigrants would be wise to follow Trump’s advice.
"They would be wise to do so, because leaving on their own will be far better for them than the many penalties they will face if they continue to remain here in violation of our nation’s laws, now that we have an administration willing to enforce the law," he said.
Eric Adams allows ICE back onto NYC's Rikers Island prison, with restrictions
New York City council member Vickie Paladino joins Fox & Friends First to discuss reopening the Rikers Island ICE office as border czar Tom Homan meets with city officials over migrant crisis.
New York City is allowing Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) to return to its Rikers Island prison following recent demands placed onMayor Eric Adamsby the Trump administration.
First Deputy Mayor Randy Mastro signed an executive order late Tuesday that allows federal immigration authorities to operate an office on Rikers Island to help carry out criminal investigations into drug trafficking, organized violence and migrant gang activity plaguing the city.
The order states that the safety of New Yorkers has been jeopardized by violent transnational gangs like MS-13 and Tren de Aragua – gangs designated as foreign terrorist organizations by theTrump administration– and there is a critical need for federal law enforcement to share "real-time" intelligence with the city’s corrections department and police.
The order allows federal law enforcement agencies to share intelligence with the corrections department and NYPD about criminal gang activity among individuals both inside and outside of custody.
It does not give ICE permission to carry out civil immigration enforcement and arrest people simply for being undocumented.
A 2014 provision significantly restricts ICE from operating in the sanctuary city’s main prison to enforce immigration detainers.
That order states that an ICE detainer can only be enforced if it is accompanied by a warrant from a federal judge and if that person had not been convicted of a "violent or serious"crime duringthe previous five years or was listed on a terrorist database.
Mastro was appointed as first deputy mayor on April 1 and was authorized by Adams to independently assess and decide whether federal law enforcement could be present on Rikers Island.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF), Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), and Homeland Security Investigations (HSI) were given permission to access the site.
ICE is part of HSI.
The move comes weeks after Adams met with border czar Tom Homan.
After the closed-door meeting, Adams said a plan was being worked on to allow ICE onto the prison site.
Adams said the pair had discussed how to combat violent migrant gangs and embedding more New York Police Department officers into federal task forces.
Adams said more than 230,000 migrants had come to the city with approximately $7 billion in taxpayers’ money doled out to house and feed them.
The news comes just days after Adams announced he will run his re-election campaign as an independent instead of participating in the Democratic primary, where he would have faced City Council Speaker Adrienne Adams – who is not related to the mayor – and others.
Border czar Tom Homan sitting down with New York City Mayor Eric Adams.(Courtesy: NY Mayor's Office)
Adams faces an uphill battle in his re-election campaign.
Former New York Gov. Andrew Cuomoannounced on March 1 that he is running for mayor as well.
Guardian Angels founder Curtis Sliwa is running on the Republican ticket in the deep blue city.
Adams easily defeated Sliwa in the city’s mayoral race in 2021.
Last week, federal charges against Adams were dismissed.
He has been accused of using his position as mayor to receive luxury travel and illegal campaign contributions from Turkish foreign nationals.
Adams insisted the case was politically motivated and was pursued in retaliation for his criticism of President Joe Biden's immigration policies.
An illegal immigrant soccer coach allegedly murdered his 13-year-old player
Los Angeles County District Attorney Nathan Hochman joins ‘Fox & Friends’ to discuss the case of an illegal immigrant from El Salvador accused of murdering a 13-year-old boy in California.
Thealleged Californiamurder of a missing 13-year-old soccer player by his illegal immigrant coach was "an avoidable crime and the result of failed border policies," a U.S. attorney told Fox News.
Mario Edgardo Garcia-Aquino, 43, allegedly killed his player, Oscar "Omar" Hernandez, in Lancaster on March 28, according to Los Angeles County District Attorney Nathan Hochman.
Multiple law enforcement sources told Fox News on Tuesday that Garcia-Aquino is anillegal immigrantfrom El Salvador.
"This was an avoidable crime and the result of failed border policies," said U.S. Attorney for the Central District of California Bill Essayli.
"We cannot and will not tolerate illegal aliens who flout our nation’s immigration laws then prey on children.
Federal law enforcement will continue to be very aggressive in locating, apprehending, and prosecuting criminal illegal aliens."
Garcia-Aquino illegally entered the U.S. as a "gotaway" at an unknown time and location, and U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) has had no previous encounters with him, a senior ICE source also told Fox News this week. 
ICE has since filed a detainer on him with the Los Angeles County jail.
Oscar "Omar" Hernandez was found dead in Southern California last week after his family reported him missing.
"Thirteen-year-old Oscar ‘Omar’ Hernandez was an innocent child who was exploited and killed by this depraved illegal alien who should have never been in this country," added Homeland Security spokesperson Tricia McLaughlin.
"Under President Trump and Secretary Noem’s leadership, child predators, pedophiles and murderers will be hunted down and removed from America’s communities."
Hochman said earlier this week that on the day of Hernandez’salleged murder,he "went up to Lancaster to see Mr. Garcia-Aquino.
"Two days later he was reported missing.
And on April 2, 2025 last week, his body was found in Oxnard off a road near Leo Carillo State Beach," Hochman added at a news conference.
His office said Garcia-Aquino is charged with "one count of murder with the special circumstance allegation of murder during the commission or attempted commission of lewd acts with a child, making him eligible for the death penalty." Additionally, Garcia-Aquino faces a possible maximum sentence of life in prison without parole.
The Los Angeles County District Attorney’s Office separately charged Garcia-Aquino on Monday with one felony count of assault with the intent to commit a sexual offense, following his alleged sexual assault of a 16-year-old boy in Palmdale in February 2024.
Mario Edgardo Garcia-Aquino, the suspect in Oscar "Omar" Hernandez's murder, had "no reported criminal history," police say.(LAPD)
Garcia-Aquino was then charged on Tuesday with the alleged sexual assault of a 14-year-old boy in December 2022.
In an interview Wednesday on "Fox & Friends," Hochman said, "when we got the first allegation in 2022...
the DA's office gets that in about August of 2023."
"We do what we do in all cases.
We analyze the evidence, and we have to not only move swiftly, but we have to win these cases beyond a reasonable doubt in court to a jury, a unanimous jury of 12.
So we want to make sure we get it right.
So we send it back for further investigation to build out the case.
And some of these cases go quickly and some don't.
This one did not," he continued.
"So the allegation for 2022 took actually until the murder allegation came forward most recently, before we were able to develop the final bit of evidence to charge him with the 2022 arrest and sexual assault of a minor."
"Under my administration, sexual violence cases are a high, high priority.
And we are making sure that any type of allegations like this come in, there is maximum cooperation from the beginning, so we hopefully don’t have a tragedy like this where we take a person like Mr.
Garcia-Aquino out of the picture before he kills someone," Hochman added.
Los Angeles County Sheriff Robert Luna said Garcia-Aquino "was a youth travel soccer coach with the Hurricane Valley Boys Soccer Club in the Sylmar area working with different age divisions" and "he had no reported criminal history."
DOJ charged nearly 1K illegal aliens with immigration-related crimes to start April
Department of Homeland Security Secretary Kristi Noem spent Tuesday morning in the field targeting illegal immigrant criminals in Arizona with ICE and law enforcement officials.
U.S. attorneys forsix southwestern border districts charged nearly 1,000 illegal aliens with immigration-related crimes during the first week of April under Operation Take Back America, the Department of Justice said on Tuesday.
The districts involved include Arizona, Central California, Southern California, New Mexico, Southern Texas and Western Texas.
The District of Arizona brought charges against 204 illegal aliens; 83 of whom were charged with illegal reentry and 107 were charged with illegal entry.
Fourteen people, including Ivan Mauricio Hernandez-Mosqueda, were also charged with smuggling humans into and within the district.
Hernandez Mosqueda, a Mexican national, was sentenced to 46 months in prison for smuggling more than 100 illegal aliens into the U.S., the DOJ said, adding that he coached some of them to "claim asylum under false pretenses" when entering the country.
U.S. attorneys in six southwestern border districts filed immigration-related charges against nearly 1,000 illegal aliens during the first week of April, according to the Department of Justice.(VALERIE MACON/AFP via Getty Images)
The Southern District of California filed 97 cases, bringing charges against defendants for transporting illegal aliens, bringing them in for financial gain, bribery by a public official, illegal reentry and bringing in controlled substances.
One of theillegal immigrants chargedis Mexican national Francisco Anguiano Rios, who attempted to bring 209 packages containing 547 pounds of cocaine across the border at the Otay Mesa Port of Entry.
There were 24 defendants charged in the Central District of California for reentering the U.S. following removal, including criminals who were found guilty of felonies prior to previous deportation.
The District of New Mexico brought charges against 99 individuals; 56 for illegal reentry after deportation, 11 for alien smuggling and 32 for illegal reentry.
The DOJ said many of the defendants were criminals with prior convictions for solicitation of a child to engage in sexual conduct, leaving the scene of a fatal accident and possession with intent to distribute meth.
In the Southern District of Texas, 225 immigration-related and border security caseswere filed against 70 people accused of illegally reentering the country and 144 accused of entering the country illegally.
The majority of those people have felony convictions for narcotics, previous immigration offenses and violent or sexual crimes.
Also in Texas, attorneys in the state's western district filed 259 criminal cases related to immigration, the DOJ said without providing specifics.
One of the people charged is Mexican national Miguel Angel Torres-Segura, who was living in San Antonio illegally and is accused of participating in a human smuggling organization that carried out at least 19 events involving more than 900 illegal immigrants between May 2021 and June 2022.
Torres-Segura has also been convicted of illegally entering the U.S. two times and illegal reentry two times.
Under President Donald Trump, the Department of Justice has been involved with initiating Operation Take Back America, which addresses the illegal immigration crisis in the United States.(AP Images / Getty Images)
"We are grateful for the hard work of our border prosecutors in bringing these cases and helping to make our border safe again," the DOJ said in a news release.
Operation Take Back America, which began when President Donald Trump was inaugurated, is aimed at curbing the illegal immigration crisis, totally eliminating cartels and transnational criminal organizations and protecting communities from violent criminals.



Impeachment articles hit federal judge blocking Trump Tren de Aragua deportation flights
The 'Fox & Friends' co-hosts discuss the latest on the legal feud between the Trump administration and an Obama-appointed judge over deportation flights to El Salvador.
FIRST ON FOX: A House GOP lawmaker has filed impeachment articles against the federal judge who ordered the Trump administration to stop deportation flights being conducted under the Alien Enemies Act.
"For the past several weeks, we've seen several rogue activist judges try to impede the president from exercising, not only the mandate voters gave him, but his democratic and constitutional authority to keep the American people safe," Rep. Brandon Gill, R-Texas, told Fox News Digital.
"This is another example of a rogue judge overstepping his…authority."
Gill's resolution, first obtained by Fox News Digital, accused U.S. District Court Judge James Boasberg of abusing his power in levying an emergency pause on the Trump administration's plans to deport illegal immigrants under a wartime authority first issued in 1798, which President Donald Trump recently invoked to get members of the criminal Venezuelan gang Tren de Aragua out of the U.S.
"Chief Judge Boasberg required President Trump to turn around planes midair that had aliens associated with Tren De Aragua, a designated Foreign Terrorist Organization," the resolution said.
"This conduct jeopardizes the safety of the nation, represents an abuse of judicial power, and is detrimental to the orderly functioning of the judiciary.
Using the powers of his office, Chief Judge Boasberg has attempted to seize power from the Executive Branch and interfere with the will of the American people."
In a brief interview with Fox News Digital shortly before filing his resolution, Gill suggested he wanted the matter to go through the House in traditional form – which would first put the resolution in front of the House Judiciary Committee, where Gill is a member.
"I'll be talking to [Chairman Jim Jordan, R-Ohio] about it," Gill said.
"I think the best way to do this…is to go through the judiciary committee, which is where impeachment of judges runs through.
I think the more we can stick with that plan, the better."
A legal firestorm is brewing after Boasberg verbally issued a 14-day restraining order Saturday night to immediately halt the Trump administration's Tren De Aragua deportation plan.
It comes in response to human rights groups arguing that Venezuelan nationals with legitimate asylum claims are in danger of being swept up in the deportations, despite having no known connection to the notorious gang.
The Texas Republican, who is class president for first-term members in the 119th Congress, first threatened to file impeachment articles against Boasberg on Sunday.
Trump backed the move on Tuesday morning in a fiery post on his Truth Social account.
Trump called him a "Radical Left Lunatic of a Judge, a troublemaker and agitator," adding, "HE DIDN’T WIN ANYTHING!
I WON FOR MANY REASONS, IN AN OVERWHELMING MANDATE, BUT FIGHTING ILLEGAL IMMIGRATION MAY HAVE BEEN THE NUMBER ONE REASON FOR THIS HISTORIC VICTORY."
"I’m just doing what the VOTERS wanted me to do.
This judge, like many of the Crooked Judges I am forced to appear before, should be IMPEACHED!!!" Trump wrote.
A video shared by El Salvadorian President Nayib Bukele shows the U.S. deportees getting their heads shaved at a notorious Salvadorian prison.
Gill accused Boasberg of knowingly "tying the president's hands so that Trump and his team, instead of executing on the mandate the voters gave him, are litigating every single action that the president is taking."  
He said it was "unconstitutional" and a "usurpation of executive authority."
The Trump administration has pointed out that the judge's written order was issued after two planes carrying alleged gang members were already in the air, arguing it was too late to turn the planes around at that point.
A third plane that took off after the first two was not carrying any Alien Enemies Act deportees, the administration said.
"All of the planes that were subject to the written order, the judge's written order, took off before the order was entered in the courtroom on Saturday," White House press secretary Karoline Leavitt said Monday.
She said the administration did not run afoul of any court order.
However, Boasberg pushed back in a court hearing later that day, according to The Associated Press, saying at one point to the Trump administration's lawyer, "I’m just asking how you think my equitable powers do not attach to a plane that has departed the U.S., even if it’s in international airspace."
The standoff could make it all the way to the Supreme Court and could have seismic repercussions on the bounds of lower-level federal judges' authority.
Gill's move also comes after similar threats by other Trump allies in the House.
Reps. Eli Crane, R-Ariz., Derrick Van Orden, R-Wis., and Andrew Clyde, R-Ga., have all vowed to file impeachment articles against U.S. District Judge Paul Engelmayer for blocking Department of Government Efficiency efforts.
The court declined to comment when reached by Fox News Digital on Gill's resolution.
DHS, HUD work to end 'exploitation of housing programs' by illegal immigrants
'The Five' co-host Judge Jeanine Pirro breaks down the media siding with alleged Venezuelan gang members over border security on 'Jesse Watters Primetime.'
The Trump administration has begun an interagency effort to end what it describes as the "exploitation of housing programs" by illegal aliens.
In a statement published on Monday, the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) announced that it had established the "American Housing Programs for American Citizens" Memorandum of Understanding (MOU).
The agreement was also signed by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS).
The MOU is geared towards ending "the wasteful misappropriation of taxpayer dollars to benefit illegal aliens instead of American citizens," the press release stated.
"As part of this new agreement, HUD will provide a full-time staff member to assist in operations at the Incident Command Center (ICC), establishing an interagency partnership to facilitate data sharing and ensure taxpayer-funded housing programs are not used to harbor or benefit illegal aliens," the release read.
DHS Secretary Kristi Noem and HUD Secretary Scott Turner are launching efforts to end the "exploitation of housing programs" by undocumented immigrants.
The effort comes a month after President Donald Trump signed an executive order (EO) to "ensure taxpayer resources are not used to incentivize or support illegal immigration." The EO, signed on Feb. 19, ordered government departments to identify which federally-funded programs are "providing financial benefits to illegal aliens," and mandated them to "take corrective action."
In a statement about the recent MOU, HUD Secretary Scott Turner referenced the ongoing housing crisis in the U.S. and characterized the issue as "pressing."
"This agreement will leverage resources including technology and personnel to ensure American people are the only priority when it comes to public housing," Turner said.
"We will continue to work closely with DHS to maximize our resources and put American citizens first."
DHS Secretary Kristi Noem blasted the Biden administration in her statement, accusing the former president of prioritizing illegal aliens "over our own citizens, including by giving illegal aliens taxpayer-funding housing at the expense of Americans."
"The entire government will work together to identify abuse and exploitation of public benefits and make sure those in this country illegally are not receiving federal benefits or other financial incentives to stay illegally," Noem said.
"If you are an illegal immigrant, you should leave now.
The gravy train is over."
IRS sharing info with ICE would put illegal immigrants in unique tricky spot: expert
Former Denver ICE field office director John Fabricatore discusses the arrests of Tren de Aragua members and other criminals on 'The Story.'
A potentially historic deal between the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) could put illegal immigrants in a difficult position, according to one expert.
"It is going to discourage those taxpayers from even filing, so it really does put them between a rock and a hard place," Adam Brewer, a federal tax expert who works for AB Tax Law, told Fox News Digital.
The comments come as the IRS and ICE are nearing a deal that would allow ICE to submit the names and addresses of illegal immigrants to the IRS, who could then cross-check those immigrants' tax records and provide the immigration agency with current address information.
But some longtime IRS employees have expressed concerns about the deal, arguing that the tax agency has long assured the safeguarding of records in exchange for illegal immigrants filing tax returns, something they are required to do by law even though they are not in the country legally.
The draft agreement between the IRS and ICE would authorize verification "subject to criminal investigation" for violating immigration law, stretching the definition of a narrow IRS privacy exemption that allows the use of taxpayer data in the case of criminal investigations.
The deal comes as President Donald Trump has continued to increase efforts to speed up deportations, following through on one of the key promises he set on the campaign trail.
According to Brewer, stretching the definition of criminal investigations to those who entered the country illegally would be an "unprecedented" step for the IRS.
President Donald Trump promised swift deportations of illegal immigrants during the 2024 campaign.
"For the IRS to get involved in criminal investigations, that's not uncommon," Brewer said.
"They have done a lot of information sharing, historically, with DEA to crack down on drug proceeds, those types of things.
I guess the way I'm looking at it is, if illegal immigration itself is the crime, if you look at it through that scope, then yes, it's pretty unprecedented."
'This feels like a deviation from what we've known for years … that if you share information with the IRS, it stops there," he added.
Brewer believes that the agreement could also damage the credibility of the IRS, which has built trust by strictly adhering to privacy regulations.
"That would be true of any government agency if they had said, ‘Hey, the DMV is going to start turning over your address to ICE.’ You're going to get less people who register their vehicles or who renew their driver's license.
That's just the reality," Brewer said.
Brewer noted that a lot of illegal immigrants depend on filing their tax returns as a way to help gain their legal status, but the potential for deportation if their records are shared could dissuade them from going through the process.
The IRS has traditionally strictly kept most tax records private.
"The IRS knows and ICE knows that these tax returns are required, and now they've really put a big disincentive in front of taxpayers from filing," Brewer said.
But Brewer also acknowledged that in some cases the information the IRS provides could prove to be a critical missing link for immigration authorities, pointing out that the IRS has long assisted other law enforcement agencies on other criminal matters.
"If someone just filed a tax return last month for 2024, that address information would be more recent or more likely to be accurate than some immigration document they filed last year," Brewer said.
"If we have the information in one department, you don't want ICE spending a ton of time and resources trying to track someone down … just for efficiency’s sake, we do want government agencies sharing information."
California sheriff says he will defy sanctuary state law
Amador County Sheriff Gary Redman criticized a sanctuary state law that limits cooperation between local law enforcement and immigration authorities.
Amador County Sheriff Gary Redman waded into a bit of controversy this year when he openly said he would buck a California law that limits cooperation between local and federal authorities.
Citing his duty to enforce public safety in his rural county located 135 miles east of San Francisco, Redman remains the only sheriff in the state who has pledged to defy California's 2017 sanctuary state law, also known as the California Values Act, or SB 54.
More specifically, Redman said he will contact U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) when he's aware that a person in local custody is in the country illegally and poses a serious public safety threat.
"It's almost [like] we're going to re-victimize the victim again.
That's what I see with this law," Redman told Fox News Digital.
"How can you tell me that I have to let somebody who is here illegally in the country … and put them back into society when they've committed a heinous crime?"
"You're making me make that choice.
Well, I'm just not willing to do it because I got elected to be the sheriff of Amador County, where public safety is my No. 1priority," he added.
The vow goes against SB 54, which allows local authorities to contact ICE only when an illegal immigrant is convicted of certain offenses and is about to be released from custody.
State lawmakers passed the law during the first Trump administration in an effort to ensure that local law enforcement is not used to assist immigration officials.
Fox News Digital has reached out to the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), various immigrant rights groups, the Amador County and statewide Republican and Democratic parties, and the governor's office for comment on the matter.
"I worked in the justice system for years and saw how weak laws put the public in danger," California Republican Party Chair Corrin Rankin told Fox News Digital.
"What we’re hearing from Sheriff Redman is what many in law enforcement have been saying for a long time: California’s sanctuary state law makes it harder to stop violent criminals."
"Democrats in Sacramento passed these laws knowing they tie the hands of sheriffs and police.
When local officials see a threat, they should be able to act," Rankin added.
Around 6% of Amador County's 42,000 residents are foreign-born, according to U.S. Census data.
Despite the low figure, Asian gangs with illegal immigrants have set up marijuana-growing operations in the area, Redman said.
"That's what we dealt with over the last 10 years," Redman said.
The sheriff announced his stance on the sanctuary state law in a February news release posted to the Amador County Sheriff’s Office Facebook page in response to persistent questions from residents about how his office would handle immigration-related matters during President Donald Trump's second term.
While other sheriffs across the state have said they will work around SB 54, Redman's announcement is different in that he makes it clear that he knows he will violate state law.
That has put him in the crosshairs of the California Attorney General's Office.
California Attorney General Rob Bonta has pledged to protect immigrant communities up and down the state by upholding SB 54, despite detractors pointing out that it allows criminal illegal immigrants to walk the streets and possibly reoffend, sometimes violently.
In an email to Fox News Digital, Bonta's office noted that federal courts have ruled that the state sanctuary law doesn’t conflict with federal law.
"The Attorney General is committed to protecting and ensuring the rights of California’s immigrant communities and upholding vital laws like SB 54, which ensure that state and local resources go toward fighting crime in California communities, not toward federal immigration enforcement," the email states.
"Federal courts have upheld SB 54 and have found it to not be in conflict with federal law (the Ninth Circuit’s 2019 opinion is attached for reference)," his office said.
"We are closely monitoring law enforcement compliance with SB 54."
Rep. Kevin Kiley, R-Calif., who recently introduced federal legislation that would enable local authorities that wish to cooperate with federal immigration enforcement to do so regardless of any state law, cited the case of David Mora, 39, who overstayed his visa after entering California in 2018 from Mexico.
In 2022, ICE asked to be notified upon Mora's release from jail after his arrest for assaulting a California Highway Patrol officer.
The Merced County Sheriff's Office had Mora in custody and received a request from ICE to detain him, but Mora was released because of the sanctuary law, the sheriff's office said.
He then killed his three daughters inside a Sacramento church as well as a chaperone who was supervising his visit with the children, before taking his own life.
"There is no doubt in my mind that if I was able to cooperate with ICE, this tragedy could have been avoided," Merced County Sheriff Vernon H. Warnke said in a statement at the time.
"Under current law, nationwide law enforcement’s hands are tied with policies that have a significant impact on our communities and their quality of life."
"The sanctuary law is utterly indefensible," Kiley told Fox News Digital.
"It has led to many, many tragedies across the state.
It's one of the reasons California has had the very worst illegal immigration problem during the Biden administration."
He added the law was "legally dubious" in that it seeks to violate federal law.
Redman, who grew up in progressive Los Angeles County, said he partially came out publicly with his stance on the sanctuary law because of the Trump administration and its willingness to defend local officials who work with ICE.
"I've always felt this way, but there wasn't a chance in hell I was going to say this under the Biden administration," Redman said.
"I didn't trust the attorney general at the time.
I didn't trust the Biden administration as far as coming after me.
Absolutely, I don't think that's going to happen under the Trump administration."
Among California sheriffs, Redman, who considers himself a moderate Republican, stands alone.
Riverside County Sheriff Chad Bianco, who is running to become California's next governor, has advocated for abolishing sanctuary state policies and requiring local law enforcement to cooperate with federal immigration authorities.
In addition to Redman, two California cities, Huntington Beach and Oroville, have defiantly declared themselves non-sanctuary cities.
In Amador County, nearly 49% of voters are registered Republicans, dwarfing the 27% who align with Democrats, according to the California Secretary of State's office.
That could be a reason why a Change.org petition calling for Redman to be removed has only received 53 signatures since March 1.
"I'm friends with a lot of progressives here in Amador County, and what they've always found is I'm reasonable and I'm willing to listen," Redman said.
"My Democratic friends have come out and said, 'We support you, Gary.
This is common sense.
We're tired of California and the way California's going where they continue to elevate criminals.'"
DHS Secretary Kristi Noem joins ICE agents going after criminal illegal immigrants in Arizona | Fox News
Department of Homeland Security Secretary Kristi Noem spent Tuesday morning in the field targeting illegal immigrant criminals in Arizona with ICE and law enforcement officials.
Department of Homeland Security (DHS) Secretary Kristi Noem spent Tuesday morning with U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) and Arizona law enforcement agents going after illegal immigrant criminals in the Phoenix area.
Standing with a gun in her hands, Noem said in a video posted to X that she was going out with ICE to pick up someone facing charges of human trafficking.
She also said she went out earlier with agents and swept up a person wanted for murder.
"I appreciate the work that they do every day, and we appreciate them working to keep America safe," Noem said.
In another post, Noem shared images of her standing with law enforcement officials and sitting in an ICE vehicle while wearing a Kevlar vest.
FEDERAL JUDGE POSTPONES DHS'S ATTEMPT TO END TEMPORARY PROTECTED STATUS FOR VENEZUELANS
She also shared pictures of law enforcement officials arresting two men, one who had no shoes and the other who was wearing a pair of Crocs.
"Arizona is safer this morning after a successful operation getting criminal illegal aliens and gang members off our streets," Noem wrote.
"Thank you to our brave law enforcement officers.
If you are in this country illegally, we will find you, arrest you, and send you back."
DHS Secretary Kristi Noem joined ICE and other agents on operations in Phoenix on Tuesday.
Noem has taken a hands-on approach to her role as the DHS secretary since President Donald Trump appointed her to the position.
She recently traveled to El Salvador’s Terrorism Confinement Center, where hundreds of migrant criminals were deported last month.
Noem toured the facility where she met face-to-face with alleged Tren de Aragua and MS-13 gang members, all of whom were wearing white prison suits and had shaved heads.
She also sent a message from the prison to illegal immigrants who are still in the U.S. or plan to visit anytime soon.
NOEM'S HOMELAND SECURITY 'UNAPOLOGETIC' ABOUT USING LIE-DETECTOR TEST ON SUSPECTED INTEL LEAKERS
"First of all, do not come to our country illegally: You will be removed, and you will be prosecuted," she said while standing with her back to the inmates.
"But know that this facility is one of the tools in our toolkit that we will use if you commit crimes against the American people."
Noem shared the video on X, saying, "President Trump and I have a clear message to criminal illegal aliens: LEAVE NOW.
If you do not leave, we will hunt you down, arrest you, and you could end up in this El Salvadorian prison."
Trump’s hard-line approach to illegal immigration was a key campaign promise, and his administration has also been arresting and deporting criminal illegal migrants across the country under the leadership of Noem and border czar Tom Homan.
Trump admin orders migrants who used Biden's CBP One app to self deport
Fox News Bill Melugin provides details on the administrations move to turn the Biden-era CBP One app into a self-deportation app for migrants.
Migrants who entered the U.S. under the Biden-era CBP One app have had their parole protections terminated and ordered to leave the U.S. immediately or face a permanent ban from reentry.
The app was used by nearly 1 million migrants to schedule appointments at official ports of entry before they were paroled into the U.S. The migrants were permitted to seek asylum and given temporary work authorization for two years while they waited for the outcomes of their respective proceedings.
Trump ended the use of the CBP One app to parole migrants on his first day in office.
His administration has also paused applications for parole programs and allowed ICE to cancel parole statuses of migrants.
Migrants who entered the U.S. under the Biden-era CBP One app have had their parole protections terminated and ordered to leave the U.S. immediately or face a permanent ban from reentry.
The Trump administration has now begun notifying migrants who used the app, telling them their legal status has been revoked, according to a report by CBS, citing a Homeland Security message the outlet obtained.
"If you do not depart the United States immediately you will be subject to potential law enforcement actions that will result in your removal from the United States — unless you have otherwise obtained a lawful basis to remain here," the message reads, per the outlet.
The notification encourages migrants to sign up for self-deportation through the CBP One app, which is now called CBP Home.
"Again, DHS is terminating your parole.
Do not attempt to remain in the United States — the federal government will find you," the notice says.
"Please depart the United States immediately."
CBS reported that the message was verified by DHS.
Fox News Digital reached out to DHS for confirmation but did not immediately receive a response.
The CBP One app launched in January 2023 and was used to admit more than 936,500 people through December 2024, the New York Post reports, citing DHS data.
A migrant uses the CBP One application during an Al Otro Lado training session in Tijuana, Mexico, on Tuesday, Nov. 28, 2023.
"Formal termination notices have been issued, and affected aliens are urged to voluntarily self-deport using the CBP Home App," a DHS spokesperson said, per the outlet.
"Those who refuse will be found, removed, and permanently barred from reentry," 
The Biden administration had expanded the use of the CBP One app to allow migrants to enter the U.S. at ports of entry or via a separate parole process.
That process involved them uploading information including a photograph.
The Biden administration also allowed for the app to be used by migrants for air travel.
The Transportation Security Administration (TSA) was permitted to verify a migrant without sufficient ID by comparing a photograph of a migrant to DHS records and also using biometric matching.
Those verified would also receive additional physical screenings.
Migrants with CBP One App interviews enter the United States at the Chaparral pedestrian border on May 16, 2023, in Tijuana, Mexico.
The Trump administration has ordered migrants who used the Biden-era CBP One app to leave the U.S. immediately and terminate their parole status.
Noem ended the use of CBP One to allow migrants to board domestic flights, unless it is being used for their self-deportation.
The administration has also canceled extensions of Temporary Protected Status for some nationalities, including for more than 600,000 Venezuelans.
TPS grants protection from deportation and allows work permits for nationals living in the U.S. from countries deemed unsafe for them to be returned.
Then-DHS Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas announced extensions for TPS for Venezuela, as well as El Salvador, Sudan and Ukraine, for an additional 18 months in the final few days of the Biden administration.
The Trump administration’s move to end Temporary Protected Status has been held up in the courts.
New Trump plan will cost migrants hefty fine for every day they don't self-deport
White House deputy chief of staff for policy Stephen Miller discusses the Supreme Court’s ruling to remove the block on the Trump administration from using the Alien Enemies Act to remove illegal migrants and criminals on ‘Hannity.’
The Trump administration plans to begin fining illegal immigrants subject to a deportation order $998 a day if they do not leave the United States.
"Illegal aliens should use the CBP Home app to self-deport and leave the country now.
If they don’t, they will face the consequences," Department of Homeland Security (DHS) Assistant Secretary Tricia McLaughlin told Fox News Tuesday.
"This includes a fine of $998 per day for every day that the illegal alien overstayed their final deportation order."
Using a 1996 law that was not enforced until President Donald Trump’s first term in 2018, the administration plans to apply the penalties retroactively to illegal immigrants for up to five years, resulting in fines of more than $1 million, an administration official told Reuters, who was first to report on the fines.
The administration could also seize property from illegal immigrants who fail to pay the stiff penalty, the report noted.
A flyer provided to Fox News Digital shows the "benefits" and "consequences" for illegal immigrants who fail to self-deport via the CBP Home app.
"Self-deportation is safe," the flyer reads.
"Leave on your own terms by picking your departure flight."
Other benefits of self-deporting include allowing non-criminal illegal immigrants to keep money they earned in the U.S. and allowing illegal immigrants to maintain eligibility for potential future legal immigration, while some illegal immigrants may even be eligible for subsidized flights if they have trouble affording a ticket.
Meanwhile, the "consequences" section of the flyer warns that those who fail to self-deport will be "apprehended by DHS with no opportunity to get your affairs in order beforehand."
Venezuelan migrants walk following their arrival on a flight after being deported from the United States, in Caracas, Venezuela, on March 24, 2025.
The flyer also spells out the potential fines, including the $998 per day fine for failing to comply with final removal orders and a fine of $1,000 - $5,000 for failing to self-deport after "claiming that you will."
"If you fail to self-deport, you may be subject to jail time," the flyer concludes, adding that illegal immigrants would also later be "prohibited from reentering the U.S. through the legal immigration system."
Mexican man convicted of killing his child to be deported after encountering ICE
DHS Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs Tricia McLaughlin discusses the charges against an illegal immigrant suspected of murder, a report that more migrants are open to self-deportation and takeaways from Sec. Noem's visit to Latin America.
An illegal immigrant convicted of killing his own child is in U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement custody after he encountered ICE officers in a Montana prison last month.
Carlos Ambriz, a 53-year-old Mexican national, made contact with ICE officers while serving a 40-year sentence in the Montana State Prison for a deliberate homicide conviction and was served a notice to appear before an immigration judge.
He was arrested near his residence in Catoosa, Oklahoma, on March 25, ICE said.
Josh Johnson, acting director for ICE Enforcement and Removal Operations Dallas Field Office, said Ambriz poses a "significant danger" to the community, especially because he was convicted of killing his own child.
"This subject’s criminal record underscores the significant danger he represents to our community, particularly with the serious charge and conviction for killing his own child," Johnson said.
"Our officers remain committed to enhancing public safety by apprehending and removing criminal aliens who violate immigration laws."
Carlos Ambriz, 53, was arrested in Oklahoma on March 15, ICE said.
Ambriz will remain in ICE custody until he is sent back to Mexico, and his upcoming deportation will not be his first.
He was ordered removed on July 3, 1999, by an immigration judge near Seattle, Washington.
Carlos Ambriz, 53, was previously deported in January 2006, after he was ordered removed in July 1999 by an immigration judge near Seattle, ICE said (ICE)
He was physically deported to Mexico near the Paseo Del Norte, Texas, Bridge on Jan. 26, 2006, according to ICE.
ACLU lawyer says 'anybody' can be deported if there's no oversight
ACLU lawyer Lee Gelernt attacked President Donald Trump for deporting several illegal immigrants to an El Salvador prison in a segment on CBS' "60 Minutes."
An American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) attorney warned that "anybody can be picked up" if President Donald Trump uses the Alien Enemies Act with no judicial oversight.
Lee Gelernt spoke on CBS' "60 Minutes" on Sunday about reports of illegal Venezuelan migrants being deported to an El Salvador prison despite allegedly having no gang ties or criminal record.
This followed the Trump administration invoking the 1798 Alien Enemies Act to immediately deport violent illegal immigrants believed to be members of gangs like Tren de Aragua.
Gelernt, who is part of the ACLU’s legal challenge against the Trump administration, insisted the president does not have the right to send someone who has been deported to a prison in a different country.
A prison guard transfers deportees from the U.S. to the Terrorism Confinement Center in Tecoluca, El Salvador.
"Every administration back to 1798 has understood this is wartime authority to be used when the United States is at war with a foreign government," Gelernt said.
"The administration is saying, 'Not only are we gonna use it against a criminal organization, but you, the courts, have no role.
You cannot tell us that we're violating the law or stop us.'"
"60 Minutes" correspondent Cecilia Vega reported on other legal concerns arising from concerns that illegal immigrants without gang ties are being sent to this prison without due process.
Gelernt warned "anything is possible" if the Trump administration continues to invoke the Alien Enemies Act this way.
"There are a lot of people who might hear what you’re saying and say, these people don’t have papers.
They should be deported.
To that, you say what?" Vega asked.
"If they are here illegally and don't have a right to stay, they can be deported back to their home country.
If they've committed crimes, they can be prosecuted and perhaps spend many, many years in a U.S. prison," Gelernt said.
"It's not a matter of, 'Can these individuals be punished?' It's a matter of how the government is gonna go about doing it.
Once we start using wartime authority with no oversight, anything is possible.
Anybody can be picked up."
Fox News Digital reached out to the White House for a comment but did not immediately receive a response.
The Trump administration acknowledged last week that it had mistakenly deported Salvadoran Kilmar Abrego Garcia to the El Salvador prison despite a federal judge ruling five years ago that he could not be deported over concerns he would become a victim of local gangs.
His request for asylum was denied, but he was given protection from deportation and ICE didn't appeal the decision.
The Trump administration has acknowledged mistakenly deporting a Salvadoran man living in Maryland to a foreign prison.
The Trump administration said Garcia’s removal was an "administrative error" but defended the decision, alleging that Garcia has ties to MS-13.
Fox News' Brie Stimson and Bill Mears contributed to this report.
Blue state sheriffs combine forces to fight back against sanctuary laws
ACLU lawyer Lee Gelernt attacked President Donald Trump for deporting several illegal immigrants to an El Salvador prison in a segment on CBS' "60 Minutes."
A group of five Minnesota sheriff’s offices inked cooperation agreements with U.S. Immigration and Customs (ICE), taking a strikingly different approach to immigration enforcement in a state known for its widespread sanctuary policies.
Minnesota’s Cass, Crow Wing, Freeborn, Itasca and Jackson counties sheriffs' offices have all entered 287g agreements with ICE since President Donald Trump took office, allowing the federal immigration agency to delegate some authority to the offices to perform immigration enforcement functions, according to a report by the Sahan Journal.
The agreements allow for increased cooperation between the local law enforcement agencies and ICE, including programs that focus on identifying and processing illegal immigrants that are already in custody and are eligible for deportation.
Another program allows for a "task force model," which brings the local agencies in to serve as a "force multiplier" for ICE, the report said.
Minnesota has widespread "sanctuary" laws, with 12 of the state's counties at least limiting their cooperation with immigration authorities.
Some local law enforcement officers will also have the opportunity to participate in 40-hour ICE training sessions under the agreements, the report notes, while agencies participating in the program are required to keep in regular contact with their nearest ICE field office when carrying out any immigration enforcement.
The agreements come in a state that has seen widespread use of so-called "sanctuary" policies that limit or prohibit a local jurisdiction’s ability to cooperate with federal immigration authorities, with the latest Center for Immigration Studies data showing 12 Minnesota counties that have passed rules limiting cooperation with ICE.
The five sheriff’s offices inking agreements with ICE over the last few months brings the total number of offices participating in 287g in the state to seven, the Sahan Journal report notes, with the five new counties joining Sherburne and Kandiyohi counties, which have long had cooperation agreements with ICE.
ICE has long had to deal with "sanctuary" juridisdictions that limit cooperation with the agency.
The agreements have already led to a growth in immigrant detentions, with a Freeborn County jail deputy telling the Sahan Journal that there has "definitely" been an "uptick" in immigration inmates since the county entered the agreement.
However, the program is not without critics, with Minnesota Attorney General Keith Ellison’s office cautioning local agencies to consider potential drawbacks.
ICE coordinates agreements with local jurisdictions to enhance enforcement.
"While 287g agreements are sometimes touted as a tool for getting violent offenders off the street, studies have shown that large numbers of people detained through 287g-related enforcement have committed only misdemeanors or traffic violations," a spokesperson for Ellison’s office told the Sahan Journal.
Fox News Digital has reached out to Walz's office for comment.