Authority of federal agents wearing masks when arresting students under scrutiny, amid warnings the tactic will be normalized
As the Trump administration continues to expand its deportation actions, startling scenes have emerged in recent weeks of masked federal agents in plain clothes detaining international students on campus or near their homes, raising serious questions about those tactics and their authority to wear face coverings.
There is no federal policy dictating when officers can or should cover their faces during arrests, but historically they have almost always worn them only while performing undercover work to protect the integrity of ongoing investigations, law enforcement experts told CNN.
Practices have seemingly changed due to the concern agents will be targeted as a byproduct of the Trump administration’s policies, in a climate where the average person can use technology to expose an officer’s personal information, said Jerry Robinette, former Immigration and Customs Enforcement and Homeland Security special agent in charge, who currently serves as a consultant for law enforcement agencies.
What we know about the federal detention of activists, students and scholars connected to universities
The Trump administration’s crackdown on immigration has taken aim at pro-Palestinian student activists and critics of Israel’s policies.
Immigration advocates, attorneys and civil litigators are warning against the normalization of federal agents concealing their faces while detaining nonviolent students.
It is standard procedure for ICE officers and other agents from the Department of Homeland Security to wear plain clothes during field operations if they properly identify themselves as a law enforcement officer, according to John Miller, CNN’s chief law enforcement and intelligence analyst.
But the issue of using masks to deliberately cover the faces of people involved in the operations has become a “lightning rod,” as footage from the detentions – which may have received less attention had the agents followed typical protocols – have “suddenly become high interest,” Miller said.
“It raises the question, if they are legitimate law enforcement agents carrying out a proper arrest under the law, why are they hiding their identities?” Miller said.
The optics are striking because historically in the US, agents have almost always gone without face coverings when arresting some of the country’s most dangerous criminals – such as John Gotti, the head of the Gambino crime family, or the cartel boss El Chapo – unlike in countries like Mexico, Italy or those in the Eastern Bloc, according to Miller and John Sandweg, former acting director of Immigration and Customs Enforcement and former acting general counsel of the Department of Homeland Security.
While the doxxing threat is “real,” Miller said, the detentions are under scrutiny because they’re not being conducted in “crowded demonstrations where they are surrounded by people with cameras and phones, recording video, but in discreet locations like residences, street corners and parking lots.”
Critics of the tactic say the Trump administration is engaging in a “double standard” by demanding bans on masks on college campuses, such as Columbia University, while allowing officers to wear them.
One such critic is Eric Lee, a member of the American Immigration Lawyers Association and the immigration attorney for several student visa holders involved in protests, including Cornell University student Momodou Taal who decided to leave the country after his visa was revoked.
“It would be amusing if it wasn’t so dangerous and hypocritical,” Lee said.
“The students I’m talking to are looking out the window, wondering if every car with tinted windows is filled with ICE agents coming to snatch and disappear them.”
Turkish national Rümeysa Öztürk was physically restrained by six plainclothes officers, most of whom were wearing face coverings, close to Tufts University’s Somerville, Massachusetts, campus where she is a PhD student.
Öztürk is one of several foreign nationals affiliated with prestigious American universities to be detained for purported activities related to terrorist organizations amid the Trump administration’s immigration crackdown.
They include Mahmoud Khalil, a prominent Palestinian activist taken into custody last month outside his Columbia University apartment, who referred to his detention as “an abduction” in a letter to Columbia University.
Khalil’s lawyer, Amy Greer, said in a statement last month: “He was chosen as an example to stifle entirely lawful dissent, in violation of the First Amendment.
The government’s objective is as transparent as it is unlawful.”
