
Here’s how mass deportations could change the housing market
Immigrants comprise more than 20% of employment in agriculture, construction, transportation, warehousing, general services and waste services, the American Immigration Council estimates.
That means employers in those industries are expected to be in a bind as Trump proceeds with mass deportations and limiting legal immigration.
“These industries have very tight labor markets, so being very restrictive and aggressive on immigration is not going to give Trump that economic growth and success that he wants,” said Giovanni Peri, an economics professor at the University of California, Davis, who studies the intersection of immigration and labor.
Peri said that labor shortages, spurred by a clamp-down on immigration, could result in rising prices for food, housing and tourism.
He added that immigration labor is essential also because of the country’s changing demographics.
“In a situation in which there are going to be many more Americans retiring, more immigration would really benefit the labor market and the growth in the economy,” Peri said.
IRS reaches data-sharing deal with DHS to help find undocumented immigrants for deportation
The Department of Homeland Security and the Internal Revenue Service finalized an agreement Monday to provide sensitive taxpayer data to federal immigration authorities as part of President Donald Trump’s deportation push, according to court filings.
As part of the deal, the IRS agreed to turn over information about undocumented immigrants who DHS says are already facing deportation orders and are under federal criminal investigation, including for the crime of failing to leave the country, according to the filings.
Treasury Secretary Scott Bessent and Homeland Security Secretary Kristi Noem signed the agreement.
CNN reported last month that the IRS was nearing a deal to help Immigration and Customs Enforcement track down undocumented immigrants for possible deportation.
The announcement comes after months of tension within IRS over the data-sharing plans and internal concerns from career officials about the legality of the collaboration.
It also comes after a tense meeting last week between the two agencies as they worked to finalize the agreement.
