Florida’s largest Venezuelan stronghold poised to join forces with ICE: report
Fox News' Madeleine Rivera provides details on the upcoming White House meeting between President Donald Trump and El Salvador's President Nayib Bukele.
The city ofDoral, Florida, a key hub for Venezuelan immigrants, is poised to ink an agreement with U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) that would allow the city’s law enforcement to carry out some immigration-enforcement operations.
Members of the Doral City Council are expected to authorize a partnership with ICE through the 287(g) program on Wednesday, which would allow Doral police officers to carry out limited immigration enforcement, such as detentions, questioning and processing those suspected of breaking federal immigration laws, according to areport by the Miami Herald.
The news comes as PresidentDonald Trumphas continued his push to ramp up deportation efforts across the country, an effort that has included the courting of several local law enforcement agencies to assist federal immigration authorities.
The inclusion of Doral in the effort would mark a seemingly surprising turn, with the city being home to one of the largest populations of Venezuelan immigrants in the country.
That fact has sparked concern among many in the local population, most notably about potential racial profiling, though city officials have attempted to ease fears and said the partnership will focus strictly on lawful enforcement.
"The intention isn’t to detain anyone based on how they look," Council Member Rafael Pineyro told the Miami Herald.
"We are obligated to follow federal and state laws, but the goal is not to target individuals based on appearance.
Our focus remains on lawful enforcement, not profiling."
One part of the program focuses on identifying and processing illegal immigrants who are already in custody and eligible for deportation.
Another part allows for local law enforcement to support ICE deportation operations in the field.
The program permits some local law enforcement officers to participate in a 40-hour ICE training session, while also requiring that the local agencies keep in regular contact with ICE when carrying outimmigration enforcement.
Doral’s involvement in the program comes as Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis has encouraged local cooperation with federal immigration authorities.
The report notes that Florida law requires enforcement agencies in charge of county jails to be enrolled in 287(g) programs.
Local activists continue to push back against the potential agreement.
"By transforming local law enforcement into instruments of the Department of Homeland Security’s enforcement, Doral’s elected officials have broken the trust of the city’s large Venezuelan community," Adelys Ferro, the executive director of the Venezuelan American Caucus, told the Miami Herald.
"The community relies on the police for protection, not persecution."
