Supreme Court orders return of Maryland man wrongly deported to El Salvador
Sen. Eric Schmitt, R-Mo., discusses efforts to deport illegal migrants under the Trump administration on 'The Ingraham Angle.'
The Supreme Court on Thursday upheld a lower court's decision to facilitate the return of Kilmar Abrego Garcia, aSalvadoran national living in Maryland,from an El Salvador prison where federal officials sent hundreds of suspected criminals and gang members in March.
Abrego Garcia, 29, was deported to the El Salvadoran megaprison last month for being an allegedMS-13 gang member,but his attorneys maintain he does not have any gang ties.
U.S. District Judge Paula Xinis ordered federal officials to coordinate his return back to Maryland in a Monday order, calling his deportation "wholly unlawful." On Thursday, the Supreme Court sided with Xinis.
"On March 15, 2025, the United States removed Kilmar Armando Abrego Garcia from the United States to El Salvador, where he is currently detained in the Center for Terrorism Confinement (CECOT)," the order states.
"The United States acknowledges that Abrego Garcia was subject to a withholding order forbidding his removal to El Salvador, and that the removal to El Salvador was therefore illegal."
This undated photo provided by Murray Osorio PLLC shows Kilmar Abrego Garcia.
Justice Sonia Sotomayor said she "would have declined to intervene in this litigation and denied the application in full."
"Nevertheless, I agree with the Court’s order that the proper remedy is to provide Abrego Garcia with all the processes to which he would have been entitled had he not been unlawfully removed to El Salvador," Sotomayor wrote.
"That means the Government must comply with its obligation to provide Abrego Garcia with ‘due process of law,’ including notice and an opportunity to be heard, in any future proceedings."
The High Courtfurther said it "properly requires the government to 'facilitate' Abrego Garcia's release from custody in El Salvador and to ensure that his case is handled as it would have been had he not been improperly sent to El Salvador."
In this undated photo provided by the U.S. District Court for the District of Maryland, a man identified by Jennifer Vasquez Sura as her husband, Kilmar Abrego Garcia, is led by force by guards through the Terrorism Confinement Center in Tecoluca, El Salvador.
The Justice Department responded to the order in a statement to Fox News in a statement.
"As the Supreme Court correctly recognized, it is the exclusive prerogative of the President to conduct foreign affairs," the statement says.
"By directly noting the deference owed to the Executive Branch, this ruling once again illustrates that activist judges do not have the jurisdiction to seize control of the President’s authority to conduct foreign policy."
Federal court filings showed Abrego Garcia had fled El Salvador to escape gang violence.
Starting around 2006, gang members "stalked, hit, and threatened to kidnap and kill him in order to coerce his parents to succumb to their increasing demands for extortion."
He entered theUnited Statesillegally in 2011 and traveled to Maryland, where his older brother, a U.S. citizen, lived.
Jennifer Vasquez Sura, the wife of Kilmar Abrego Garcia of Maryland, who was mistakenly deported to El Salvador, speaks during a news conference at CASA's Multicultural Center in Hyattsville, Md., Friday, April 4, 2025.
Around 2016, Abrego Garcia became romantically involved with a female U.S. citizen — Jennifer Vasquez Sura — and her two children, also U.S. citizens.
They moved in together and the woman became pregnant with his child.
Abrego Garcia worked in the construction industry to support his family, court filings say.
On March 28, 2019, Abrego Garcia went to a Home Depot in Hyattsville, Maryland, to solicit employment and was recruited by three other men.
Prince George County Police Department soon arrived at the scene and detained all four men.
A prison guard transfers deportees from the U.S. to the Terrorism Confinement Center in Tecoluca, El Salvador, on Sunday.
"At the police station, the four young men were placed into different rooms and questioned.
Plaintiff Abrego Garcia was asked if he was a gang member; when he told police he was not, they said that they did not believe him and repeatedly demanded that he provide information about other gang members," court documents state.
"The police told Plaintiff Abrego Garcia that he would be released if he cooperated, but he repeatedly explained that he did not have any information to give because he did not know anything."
A judge later granted his release, and Abrego Garcia married his now-wife in 2019.
He did, however, miss the birth of his child while in federal custody, the federal complaint says.
Abrego Garcia was arrested in Baltimore on March 12 after he worked a shift as a sheet metal apprentice in Baltimore and picked up his now-5-year-old son, who has autism and other disabilities, from his grandmother’s house, the complaint says.
